THE Castle of Health, Corrected, and in some places Augmented by the first
Author thereof, Sir Thomas Elyot Knight.

AND NOW NEVVLIE perused and printed in the Year of our Lord. 1595.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.



AT LONDON Printed by the Widow Orwin, and are to be sold by Matthew Lownes.

THE PROHEME OF SIR THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT, INTO his book called the Castle of
Health.
GAlen the most excellent Physician feared, that in writing a compendious
doctrine for the curing of sickness, he should lose all his labour, for as much
as no man almost did endeavour himself to the finding of truth, but that all
men did so much esteem riches, possessions, authority, and pleasures, that
they supposed them, which were studious in any part of Sapience, to be mad or
distract of their wits, for as much as they deemed the chief Sapience, which
is in knowledge of things belonging as well to God as to man, to have no being.
Since this noble writer found that lack in his time, when there flourished in
sundry Countries a great multitude of men, excellent in all kinds of learning,
as it doth yet appear by some of their works, why should I be grieved with
reproaches, wherewith some of my Country do recompense me, for my labours
taken without hope of temporal reward, only for the fervent affection, which I
have ever borne toward the public weal of my Country? A worthy matter,
saith one, Sir Thomas Elyot is become a Physician, and writes in Physic,
which beseems not a Knight, he might have been much better occupied. Truly
if they will call him a Physician, which is studious about the weal of his
Country, I voutchsafe they so name me, for during my life, I will in that
affection always continue. And why, I pray you, should men have in disdain or
small reputation the science of Physic? Which being well understood, truly
experienced, and discreetly ordered, doth conserve health, without the which
all pleasures be painful, riches unprofitable, company annoyance, strength
turned to feeblenes, beauty to lothsomnesse, senses are dispersed; eloquence
interrupted, remembrance confounded, which hath been considered of wise men,
not only of the private estate, but also of Emperors, Kings, and other great
Princes, who for the universal necessity, and incomparable utility, which they
perceived to be in that science of Physic, they did not only advance honour
it with special privileges, but also diverse many of them were therein right
studious, in so much as Iuba the King of Mauritanie Lybia, found out the
virtuous qualities of the herb called Euforbium Gentius King of Illyria,
found the virtues of Gentia. The herb Lysimachia took his name of King
Lysimachus* Mithridates the great King of Pontus, found first the virtues of
Scordion, and also invented the famous medicine against poison, called
Mithridate. Arthemisia Queen of Carta found the virtues of Mother wort, which
in latin bears her name, whereby her noble rename hath longer continued,
then by the making of the famous Monument over her dead husband, called
Mausoleum, although it were reckoned among the wonderful works of the world,
and yet her name with the said herb still abides, whiles the said Monument a
thousand years passed, was utterly dissolved.

It seems, that Physic in this Realm hath been well esteemed, since the
whole study of Sale^ne, at the request of a King of England, wrote and set
forth a compendious and profitable treatise, called the Governance of Health,
in latin Regimen Sanitatis: And I trust in almighty God, that our sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty, who daily prepares to stablish among us true and
vnco^upted doctrines, will shortly examine also this part of study, in such
wise, as things apt for medicines, growing in this Realm, by* coference with
most noble authors may be so known, that we shall have less need of things
brought out of far Countries by the cor^on whereof, innumerable people have
perished, without blame to be given to ^ hisitions, saving only, that some of
them be not diligent enough in beholding ^ drugs or ingredients, at all times
dispensed and tried.

Besides the said Kings whom I have rehearsed, other honourable personages have
written in this most excellent doctrine, and not only of the speculative part,
but also of the practise thereof, whose works do yet remain unto their glory
immortal, as Auicenna, Auenzoar, Rasis, Cornclius Celsus, Sorani^s, and which
I should have fi^st named Machaon, and Podal^rius noble Dukes in Grecia, which
came to the siege of Troy, and brought with them xxx. great ships with men of
war. This well considered, I take it for no shame to study that Science, or
to set forth any books of the same, being thereto provoked by the most noble
and virtuous example of my most noble Master. King Henry the viij. whose health
I heartily pray God as long to preserve as GOD hath constituted mans life to
contin^: for his highness hath not disdained to be the chief author and setter
forth of an introduction into Grammar, for the children of his loving subjects,
whereby having good masters, they shall most easily and in short time apprehend
the understanding and form of speaking true and eloquent latin. O royal
hart, full of very nobility. O noble breast, setting forth virtuous doctrine,
and laudable study.

But yet one thing much grieves me, that notwithstanding I have ever honoured
specially favoured the reverend College of approved Physicians, yet some of
them hearing me spoken of have said in derision, that although I were prettily
seen in historics, yet being not learned in Physic, I have put in my book
diverse errors, in presuming to write of herbs and medicines. First as
concerning histories, as I have planted them in my works, being well
understood, they be not so light of importance, as they do esteem them, but
may more su^ely cure men's affections then diverse Physicians do eure maladies.
Nor when I wrote first this book, I was not all ignorant in physic. For
before that I was twenty years old, a worshipful Physician, and one of the
most renowned at that time in England, perceiving me by nature inclined to
knowledge, read unto me the works of Galen, of temperaments, natural
faculties, the introduction of Iohannicius, with some of the Aphorisms of
Hipocrates, And afterward by mine own study, I read over in order the more
part of the works of Hipocrates, Galen, Oribasius, Pa^lus Celsus, Alexander
Trallianus, Celsus, Plimus, the one and the other, with Dioscorides. Nor did I
omit to read the long Canons of A^icen^, the commentaries of Aucrrois, the
practises of Isake, Haliabhas, Rasis, Mesue and also of the more part of them
which were their aggregators and followers. And although I have never been at
Mountpellier, Pad^a, nor Sale^ne, yet have I found some thing in Physic,
whereby I have taken no little profit concerning mine own health. Moreover I
wot not why Physicians should be angry with me, since I wrote and did set forth
the Castle of Health for their commodity, that the uncertain tokens of
vrines, and other excrements should not deceive them, but that by the true
information of the sick man, by me instructed, they might be the more sure to
prepare medicines convenient for the diseases.

Also to the intent that men observing a good order in diet, and preventing the
great causes of sickness, they should of those maladies the sooner be cured. But
if Physicians be angry, that I have written Physic in English, let them
remember that the Greekes wrote in Greek, the Romaynes in Latin, Auicenna and
the other in Arabike, which were their own proper and maternal tongues. And
if they had been as much attached with envy couetise, as some now seem to be,
they would have devised some particular language with a strange cipher or
form of letters, wherein they would have written their science, which
language or letters no man should have known, that had not professed and
practised Physic: but those although they were Paynims Iewes, yet in this
part of charity they far surmounted us Christians, they that would not have so
necessary a knowledge as Physic is, to be hid from them which would be
studious about it.

Finally God is my ^dge, I writ neither for glory, rewa^le, nor promotion,
only I desire men to deem well mine intent, since I dare assure them, that all
that I have written in this book, I have gathered of most principal writers
in Physic. Which being thoroughly studied, and remembered, shall be profitable
(I doubt not) unto the reader, and nothing noyous to honest Physicians, that
do measure their study, with moderate living and christian charity.

A Table of the special things, which are contained in this Book.
A
ANnexed to things natural. Fol. 2. 36. Ages. 16. 59 Air. 2. 18 Apples. 30
Almonds. 32 Anyse seed. 36 Ale. 54 Abstinence. 83 Affects of the mind. 95
Autumn. 38
B
Blood. 12 Beetes. 35 Birds. 44 Brain exceeding in heate. 5 Brain exceeding
in cold. 6 Brain moist. ibidem. Brain dry. ibidem. Brain hot and moist.
ibidem. Brain hot and dry. 7 Brain cold and moist. ibidem. Brain cold and
dry. ibidem. Brain sick. 129 Breast sick. ibidem. Beef, 42 Beans. 37.
Breakfast. 64 Bloudsuckers. 94 Bourage. 39 Bread. 41 Black bird. 45 Bustard.
ibidem. Bittour, ibidem. Brain of beasts. 47 Butter. 48 Beer. 54 By what
tokens one may know whether the stomach and head be hot or cold. 121
C
COnsiderations of things belonging to health. 1 Complexions of man. 3
Choberike body. 4 Choler. 13 Choler natural. 14 Choler ^nnaturall. ibidem,
Colour. 17 Colour of inward causes. ibidem. Colour of outward causes. ibidem.
Colour of vrines. 130 Colour of hair. 17 Causes whereby the air is corrupted.
18 Custom. 24 Commodity happening by moderate use of the qualities of meat.
26 Cucumbers. 28 Cherries. 30 Chestnuts. 32 Capers. 33 Colewortes and cabages.
34 Cycory. ibidem. Cheruile. 35 Carretes. 38 Considerations in abstinence. 83
Cloves. 41 Conny. 43 Capons, hens, and chickens. 44 Crane. 45 Cheese. 48 Cider.
54 Confortatlues of the heart. 103 Children. 102 Counsels against
ingratitude. 100 Chances of fortune. 102 Crudity. 112 Concoction. ibidem.
D
DIstemperature happening by excess of sundry qualities of meates. 26 Dear
red and falow. 43 Dates. 28 Duck. 45 Diversity of meates. 65 Digestiues of
choler. 89 Digestiues of fleam. 90 Diet concerning sundry times of the year.
59 Dominion of sundry complexions. 104 Diet of sanguine persons. 107 Diet of
choleric persons. ibidem. Diet of fleumaticke persons. 109 Diet of
melancholic persons. 110 Diet of them which be ready to fall into sickness.
126 Diet in time of pestilence. 137 Drink between meals. 64 Drink at
meals. 69 Digested. 82 Death of children. 102
E
Elements. 2 Earth. ibidem. Endiue. 35 Eggs. 48 Exercise. 72. and 75
Evacuation. 81 Excrementes. 82
F
FLeumaticke body. 4 Fire. 2 Fleam. 13 Fleam natural. ibidem. Fleam
unnatural. ibidem. Fruits. 27 Figs. 29 Fenell. 36 Fylberdes. 32 Flesh. 42
Fesant. 44 Feet of beasts. 47 Fish. 48 Fricasics or rubbings. 73
G
GEnitories hot. 11 Genitories cold. ibidem. Genitories moist. ibidem.
Genitories dry. ibidem. Genitories hot and moist. ibidem. Genitories hot and
dry. ibidem. Genitories cold and moist. 12 Genitories cold and dry. ibidem.
Gourdes. 27 Grapes. 29 Garlic. 38 Ginger. 41 Goose. 45 Gysar of birds. 46
Gluttonic. 67 Gestation. 77
H
HArt ^oat distempered. 7 Hart cold distempered. 8 Hart moist distempered.
ibidem. Hart dry distempered. ibidem. Hart hot and moist. ibidem. Hart hot and
dry. ibidem. Hart cold and moist. 9 Hart cold and dry. ibidem. Hart sick. 129
Humours. 12 Humour superfluous. 82 Herbs used in potage or to eat. 33 Hare. 43
Hearon. 45 Hart of beasts. 46 Head of beasts. 47 Hasyll nuts. 32 Honey. 55
Hemeroides or piles. 95 Heaviness or sorrow. 98
I
ISope. 39 Joy. 103 Ire. 96
K
Kid. 43
L
Liver in heate distempered. 9 Liver cold distempered, ibidem. Liver moist
distempered. ibidem. Liver dry distempered. ibidem. Liver sick. 129 Lettise.
33 Leekes. 38 Lamb. 42 Lark. 44 Livers of birds and beasts. 46 Lunges of
beasts. ibidem. Letting of blood. 91 Leaches or blood succkers. 94 Loss of
goods. 102 Lack of promotion. ibidem. Lassitude. 123. 125
M
Melancholic body. 5 Melancholy. 14 Melancholy natural. ibidem. Melancholy
unnatural. ibidem. Members instrumental. 15 Meat and drink. 19 Meates
making good juice. ibidem. Meates making ill juice. 20. Meates making thick
juice. ibid. 21. Meates making choler. 20 M^king fleume. ibidem. ^gendring
melancholy. ibid. Meates hurting the teeth. 21 Meates hurting the eyes. ibidem.
Meates making opilations. 22 Meates windy. ibidem. Melons. 27 Medlars. 31
Mallowes. 35 Mutton. 42 Moderation in dies. 62 Meaies. 63 M^ces. 41 Members of
birds. 46 Mylt or spleen. ibidem. Marowe. 47 Milk. 52
N
NVtmegges. 41 Nauewes. 37
O
Official members. 75 Operations. 16 Olyues. 32 Orenges. 33 Onions. 38 Order
in eating and drinking. 68 Oppilations what they are. 61 Obstruction or
rupture. ibidem. Old men. 61 Ordure. 82
P
Principal members. 14 Parts similaries. 14 Powers natural. 15 Powers
spiritual, ibidem. Powers animal. 16 Pepons. 27 Peaches. 30 Pears. 31
Pourslane. 35 Parseley. 36 Purgers of choler. 89 Purgers of fleume. 90 Purgers
of melancholy. ibidem. Precebtes of Diocles. 133 Pomegranates. 31 Prunes. 32
Peason. 37 Parsneppes. 38 Peniroyall. 40 Pepper. ibidem. Partridge. 44 Plouer.
45 Pigeons. ibidem. Particular commodities of every purgation, 87 Peculiar
remedies of every humour. 106 Purgations by siege. 86. and 87.
Q
QVantie of meat. 22 Quality of meat. 22. 23. 24 Quinces. 30 Quails. 44
R
RAisons. 29 Rapes. 37 Radish. 38 Rokat. 39 Rosemarie. 40 Replerian. 80 Rheumes
and remedies therefore. 116
S
SAnguine body. 3 Stomach hot. 10 Stomach cold. ibidem. Stomach moist.
ibidem. Stomach dry. ibidem. Spirit natural. 15 Spirit vital. ibidem.
Spirit animal. 16 Stones of beasts. 47 Sorrel. 36 Sage. 39 Stomach in the
which meat is corrupted. 130 Stomach sick. 129 Sleep and watch. 70 Sauery.
39 Saffron. 41 Swines flesh. 42 Sparrows. 45 Shouelar. ibidem. Supper. 63
Sugar. 56 Syrope acetose. 126 Springtime. 57 Summer. 58 Scarifying. 93
Sicknesses appropried to sundry seasons and ages. 126 Significations of
sickness. 128 Substance of vrines. 131 Spices. 40
T
THings natural. 1 Things not natural. ibidem 18 Things against nature. (...)
Things good for the head. 21 Things good for the heart. ibidem. Things good for
the liver. 22 Things good for the lunges. ibidem. Things good for the eyes.
ibidem. Things good for the stomach. ibid. Temperature of meates. 25
Turneppes. 37 Time. 39 Towncresses. 40 Trypes. 46 Tongue of beasts. 47 Time.
57. 58 Times in the day cocerning meals 63 Times appropried to every humour 105

V
VEale. 43 Venison. ibidem. Vdder. 47 Vociferation. 78 Vomit. 84 Vrines. 130
Virtue of meates. 136
W
WYndes. 18 Wal^s. 31 Woodcockes. 45 Water. (...) VVynter. (...) VVyne. 51
VVhay. 55
Y
Young man. 60
Thus ends the Table.
The first Book of the Castle of Health.
TO the conservation of the body of mankind, within the limitation of health,
(which as Galen saith) is the state of the body, wherein we be neither grieved
with pain, nor let from doing our necessary business, doth belong the
diligent consideration of three sorts of things, that is to say:

Things natural. Things not natural, and Things against nature.
Things natural be 7. in number.

Elements. Complexions. Humours. Members. Powers. Operations. Spirits.
These be necessary to the being of health, according to the order of their
kind, and be always in the natural body.

Things not natural be 6 in number.

Air. Meates and drink. Sleep and watch. Moving and rest. Emptines
repletion. Affects of the mind.
Things against nature be three.

Sickness. Cause of sickness. Accident which follows sickness.
Annexed to things natural.

Age, Colour, Figure, and diversity of kinds.

The elements be those original things vnmixt and vncompound, of whose
temperance and mixture, all other things having corporal substance, be
com^act. Of them be four, that is to say:

Earth. Water. Air. Fire.
Earth is the most gross and ponderous element, and of her proper nature is
cold and dry.

Water is more subtle and light then earth, but in respect of Air and fire,
it is gross and heavy, and of her proper nature is cold and moist.

Air is more light and subtle than the other two, and being not altered with
any exterior cause, is properly hot and moist.

Fire is absolutely light and clear, and is the clarifier of other elements,
if they be vitiat or out of their natural temperance, and is properly hot
and dry.

This is to be remembered, that none of the said elements be commonly seen or
felt of mortal men, as they are in their original being: but they which by
our senses be perceived, be corrupted with mutual mixture, and be rather
earthly, watery, airy, and fiery, than absolutely earth, water, air, and
fire.

Of the complexion of man. CAP. 2.
COmplerion is a combination of two diverse qualities of the four elements in
one body, as hot and dry of the fire, hot and moist of the air, cold and
moist of the water, cold and dry of the earth. But although all these
complexions be assembled in every body of man and woman, yet the body takes
his denomination of those qualities which abound in him, more than in the
other, as hereafter ensues.

The body, where heate and moisture have sovereignty, is called Sanguine,
wherein the air hath pre-eminence, and it is perceived and known by these
signs, which do follow.

Sanguine. Carnosttie or fleshinesse. The veins and arteries large. Hair
plenty and red. The visage white and ruddy. Sleep much. Dreams of bloody
things, or things pleasant. Pulse great and full. Digestion perfect. Angry
shortly. Siege, urine, and sweat abundant. Falling shortly into bleeding. The
urine red and gross.

Where cold with moisture prevails, that body is called fleumatike, wherein
water hath pre-eminence, and is perceived by these signs following.

Fleumatike. Fatness quauing and soft. Ueines narrow. Hair much and plain.
Colour white. Sleep superfluous, Dreams of things watery or fish. Slowness.
Dullness in learning. Cowardice. Pulse slow and little. Digestion weak.
Spettle white, abundant, and thick urine gross, white and pale.

Choleric, is hate and dry, in whom the fire hath pre-eminence, and is
discerned by these signs following.

Choleric. Leannes of body. Costifenesse. Hair black or dark, aburne,
curled. Uisage and skin red as fire, or salowe. Hot things noyfull to him.
Little sleep. Dreams of fire, fighting, or anger. Wit sharpe and quick.
Hardy, and fighting. Pulse swift and strong. Urine high coloured and clear.
Voice sharpe.

Melancholic is cold and dry, over whom the earth hath dominion, and is
perceived by these signs following.

Melancholic. Leannes with hardness of skin. Hair plain and thin. Colour
duskish, or white with leannes. Much watch. Dreams fearful. Stiff in
opinions. Digestion slow and ill. Timorous and fearful. Anger long fretting.
Pulse little. Seldom laughing. Urine watery and thin.

BEsides the said complexions of all the whole body, there be the particular
members complexion, wherein if there be any distemperance, it brings
sickness or grief into the member: wherefore to know the distemperature,
these signs following would be considered. Foreseen that it be remembered,
that some distemperatures be simple, some be compound. They which be simple,
be in simple qualities, as in heate, cold, moist, or dry.

They which be compound, are in compound or mixed qualities, as heate and
moisture: heate and drith: cold and moist: cold and dry. But now first will we
speak of the simple complexions of every principal member, beginning at the
brain.

The brain exceeding in heat, hath The head and visage very red and hot. The
hair growing fast, black curled. The veins in the eyes apparent. Superfluous
matter in the nosethrils, even, and ears. The head much annoyed we hot meates,
drinks, and savours. Sleep short and not sound.

The brain exceeding in cold, hath Much superfluity running out of ye nose,
mouth, ears and even. Hair straight and fine, growing slowly and flaxen. The
head disposed by small occasion to poses and murres. It is soon annoyed with
cold. It is cold in touching. Ueines of the even not seen. Sleepy somewhat.

Moist in excess, hath Hairs plain. Seldom or never bald. Wit dull. Much
superfluities. Sleep much and deep.

The brain dry, hath No superfluities running. Wits good and ready.
Watchful. Hairs black, hard, and fast growing. Bald shortly.

Complexions compounded.
Brain hot moist distempered, hath The head aching and heavy. Full of
superfluities in the nose. The Southern wind grievous. The Northern wind
wholesome. Sleep deep, but unquiet, with often waknings, and strange
dreams. The senses and wit imperfect.

Brain hot and dry distempered, hath None abundance of superfluity which
may be expelled. Senses perfect. Much watch. Sooner bald then other. Much hair
in childhood, and black or browne and curled. The head hot and ruddy.

Brain cold moist distempered, hath The sense and wit dull. Much sleep. The
head soon replenished with superfluous moisture. Distillations and poses, or
murres. Not shortly bald. Soon hurt with cold.

Brain cold and dry distempered, hath The head cold in feeling, and without
colour. The veins not appearing. Soon hurt with cold. Often disgraced. Wit
perfect in childhood, but in age dull. Aged shortly and bald.


Of the Heart.
The heart hot distempered, hath Much blowing and pu^ing. Pulse swift and
busy. Hardiness and manhood. Much promptness, activity, and quickness in
doing of things. Fury and boldness. The breast hairy toward the left side.
The breast broad and the head little. The body hot, except the liver do let
it.

The heart cold distepered, hath The pulse very little. The breath little and
slow. The breast narrow. The body al cold, except ye liver do inflame it*
Fearefulnes. Scrupulosity and much care. Curiosity. Slowness in acts. The
breast clean without hairs.

The heart moist distepered, hath The pulse soft. Soon angry, and soon
pacified. The body al moist, except the liver disposes contrary.

The heart dry distempered, hath The pulse hard. Not lightly angry, but being
angry, not soon pacified. The body dry except the liver doth dispose
contrary.

The heart hot moist, hath The breast and stomach hairy. Promptness in acts.
Soon angry. Fierceness, but not so much as in hot and dry. Pulse soft, swift
and busy. Breath or wind according, shortly falls into diseases caused of
putrifactio.

The heart hot and dry. The heart pulse great and swift. The breath or wind
according. The breast and stomach all hairy. Quick in his doings. Boldness and
hardness. Swift, and hasty in moving. Soon stirred to anger, and tyrannous in
manners. The breast broad, and all the body hot and dry.

The heart cold and moist, hath The pulse soft. Fearful and timorous. Slow.
The breast clean without hair. Not hastily angry, nor retaining anger. The
breast narrow. All the body cold and moist.

The heart cold dry, hath The pulse hard and little. The wind moderate.
Seldom angry, but when it happens it dureth long. The breast clean without
hair and little. All the body cold and dry.


Of the Liver.
The liver in heat distempered, hath The veins great. The blood more hot then
temperate. The belly hairy. All the body hot exceeding temperate.

The liver cold distempered, hath The veins great. Abundance of fleam. The
blood cold. All the body cold in feeling. The belly without hair.

The liver moist distepered, hath The veins soft. Much blood and thin. All the
body moist in feeling, except the heart disposes it contrary.

The liver dry distempered, hath The veins hard. The blood little and thick.
All the body dry.


The complerions compound may be discerned by the said simple qualities. And
here is to be noted, that the heat of the heart may vanquish the cold of the
liver. For heate is in the heart, as in the fountain or spring: and in the
liver, as in the river.

Of the stomach.
The stomach hot distempered. He digests well, especially hard meates, and
that will not be shortly altered. Light meats and soon altered, be therein
corrupted. The appetite little and slow. He delights in meates and drinks
which be hot: for every natural complexion delights in his semblable.

The stomach cold distempered. He hath good appetite. He digests ill slowly,
specially gross meates and hard. Cold meates do wax sour, being in him
vndigested. He delights in meates drinks which be cold, yet in them he is
indamaged.

The stomach moist distempered. He thirsts but seldom, yet he desires to
drink, with superfluous drink he is hurt. He delights in moist meates.

The stomach dry distempered. He is soon thirsty. Content with a little
drink. Diseased with much drink. He delights in dry meates.


It is to be noted, that the dispositions of the stomach natural, do desire
that which is of like qualities. The dispositions unnatural, do desire things
of contrary qualities.

Also not the stomach only causes a man to thirst, or not thirst, but also
the liver, the lungs, and the heart.

Of the genitories or stones of generation.
The genitories hot distempered, have Great appetite to the act of generation.
Engendering men children. Hair soon grown about the members.

The genitories cold distempered, have Small appetite to the act of generation.
Engendering women children. Slow growth of hair about the members.

The genitories moist distempered, have Seed abundant, but thin and watery.
The genitories dry distempered, have Seed little, but meetly thick in
substance.
Genitories hot moist, have Less appetite to lechery than in the which be hot
and dry. More puissance to do it, and without less damage. Hurt by
abstaining from it. Less hairines than in hot and dry.

The genitories hot and dry, have The seed thick. Much fruitfulnes of
generation. Great appetite and readiness to the act. Hair about the mebers
soon grown. Swiftness in speeding of the act. Soon there with satisfied.
Damage by using thereof.

The genitories cold moist, have The seed watery and thin. Little desire to
the act, but more puissance then in them which be cold and dry. Little hair
or none about the members.

The genitories cold dry, have Hairs none or few. Little appetite or none to
lechery. Little puissance to do it. Engendering more females than men
children. That little seed is thicker than in cold and moist.


Of Humours.
IN the body of man be four principal humours, which continuing in the
proportion, that nature hath li^ted, the body is free from all sickness.
Contrariwise, by the increase or diminutio of any of them in quantity or
quality, over or under their natural assignement, unequal temperature
comes into the body, which sickness follows more or less according to
the lapse or decay of the temperatures of the said humours, which be these
following.

Blood, Fleume, Choler, Melancholy.
Blood hath pre-eminence over all other humours in susteining of all living
creatures, for it hath more coformitie with the original cause of living, by
reason of temperatnes in heate and moisture, also nourishes more the body,
and restores that which is decayed, being the very treasure of life, by loss
whereof death immediately follows. The distemperature of blood happens by
one of the other three humours, by the inordinate or superfluous mixture of
them.

Of Fleume.
Fleume is of two sorts. Natural, and unnatural.
Natural fleume is a humour cold moist, white and sweet, or without taste,
engendered by insufficient decoction in the second digestion of the watery or
raw parts of the matter decoct, called Chilus, by the last digestion made apt
to be converted into blood. In this humour water hath dominion most
principal.

Fleume unnatural is that which is mixed with other humours, or is altered in
his quality: and thereof is eight sundry kinds.

Fleume. Watery, which is found in spettle of great drinkers, of them which
digest it. Slimy or raw. Glasie like to white glass, thick. Uiscous like
bird-lime and heavy. Plaistrie which is very gross, and as it were chalky,
such is found in the joints of them which have the gowte. Salt that is mingled
with choler. Sower mixed with melancholy, that comes of corrupt digestion.
Harsh, thick and gross, which is seldom found, which tastes like green
crabs or sloes. Stiptick or binding is not so gross nor cold, as harsh, and
hath the taste like to green red wine, or other like straining ye tongue.

Choler doth participate with natural heate as long as it is in good
temperance. And thereof is also two kinds. Natural, and unnatural.

Choler natural. Natural choler is the some of blood, the colour whereof is
red and clear, or more like to an orange colour, and it is hot dry, wherein
the fire hath dominion: is light and sharpe, and is engendered of the most
subtle part of matter decoct or boiled in the stomach, whose beginning is in
ye liver.
Unnatural choler is that which is mixed or corrupted with other humours,
whereof be four kinds.

Citrine or yellow choler, which is the mixture of natural choler, and watery
fleume: and therefore hath less heate then other choler.

Yolkie like the yelks of eggs, which is of the mixture of (...) conge^d, and
^oler natural, and is yet less hot then the other.

Green like unto leekes, whose beginning is rather of the stomach then of the
liver.

Green like to green canker of mettle, and burns like venom, and is of
exceeding ^stion of choler or fleume, and by those two ^ds nature is mortified.

Melancholy or black choler in divided into two kinds.
Natural, which is the dregs of pure blood, and is known by the blacknes
when it issues either downward or upward, and is verily cold or dry.
Unnatural, which pr^deth of the adustion of choleric mixture, and is hoter
and lighter, having in it violence to kill, with a dangerous disposition.
Of the Members.
There be (...) of members: that is to say,
The brain. The liver. The heart. The stones of generation.
Official members. Synewes which do serve to the brain. Arteries or pulses,
which do serve to the heart. Ueines which do serve to the liver. Uessels
spermaticke, wherein mans seed lies, which do serve to the stones.

Parts called Similares, for being divided, they remain in themselves like as
they were. Bones. Gristell. Cales betwixt the uttermost skin and the flesh.
Muscules or fillets. Fat flesh.

Members instrumental. The stomach. The rains. The bowels. All the great
synewes.

These of their virtue do appetite meat and alter it.

Of powers. Animal. Spiritual. Natural.

Natural power. Which do minister. To whom is ministered.

Which doth minister. Appetiteth. Retains. Digests. Expels.

To whom is ministered. Engenders. Nourishes. Feeds.

Power spiritual. Working, which dilateth the heart and arteries, and
eftsoones streineth them. Wrought, which is stirred by an exterior cause to
work, whereof comes anger, indignation, subtlety and care.

Power animal That which ordains, decerns and composes. That moves by
voluntary motion. That which is called sensible, whereof do proceed the five
wits.

Of that which ordains do proceed Imagination in the forehead. Reason in
the brain. Remembrance in the noddle.

Operations, Appetite by heate and drith. Digestion by heate and moisture.
Retaining by cold and drith. Expulsion by cold and moist.

Spirit is an airy substance, subtle, stirring the powers of the body, to
perform their operations, which is divided into

Natural, which takes his beginning of the liver, by the veins which have no
pulse, spreads into the whole body. Uitall, which proceeds from the heart,
by the arteries or pulses is sent into the whole body. Animal, which is
engendered in the brain, and is sent by the synewes throughout the body, and
makes sense or feeling.
Annexed to things natural.
Ages, be 4. Adolescentie to 25. years, hot and moist, in the which time the
body grows. Iuuentute unto 40. years, hot and dry, wherein the body is
in perfect growth. Senectute unto 60. years, cold and dry, wherein the body
begins to decrease.


Age decrepit until the next time of life, accidentally moist, but naturally
cold and dry, wherein the powers and strength of the body be more and more
minished.

Colour.
Of inward causes. Of outward causes.
Colours of inward causes. Of equality of humours, as he that is red and
white. Of inequality of humours, whereof do proceed black, salowe, pale, or
white only. Black Red Salow
do betoken dominion of heate.
White, cold fleume. Pale, cold melancholy. Red, abundance of blood. Salow,
choler citrine. Black, melancholy or choler adust.

Colour of outward causes. Of cold or heate, as English men be white, Moors
be black. Of things accidental, as of fear, of anger, of sorrow, or other
like motios.

Colour of hair. Black, either of abundance of choler inflamed, or of much
incending or adustion of blood. Red hair of much heate, not adust. Gray hairs
of abundance of melancholy. White hairs of the lack of natural heat, and by
occasion of fleume putrified.

All the residue concerning things natural contained in the Introduction of
Ioannitius, and in the little craft of Galen, I purposely pass over for this
time, for as much as it doth require a reader having some knowledge in
philosophy natural, or else, it is hard and tedious to be understood. Moreover,
this which I have written in this first table, shall be sufficient to the
conservation of health, I mean with that which now follows in the other
tables.

The second Table.
THings not natural be so called, because they be no portion of a natural
body, as they be, which be called natural things, but yet by the temperance
of them, the body being in health, so consists: by the distemperance of
them, sickness is induced, and the body dissolved.

The first of things not natural, is air, which is properly of it self, or
of some material cause or occasion good or ill.

That which is of it self good, hath pure vapors and is odoriferous.

Also it is of it self, swift in alteration from hot and cold, wherein the
body is not much provoked to sweat for heate, no too chill for vehemence of
cold.

Air among al things not natural is chiefly to be observed, for as much as it
doth enclose us, and also enter into our bodies, specially the most notable
member, which is the hart, and we cannot be separated one hour from it, for ye
necessity of breathing fetching of wind.

The causes whereby the air is corrupted be specially sour.

Influence of sundry stars. Great standing waters never refreshed. Carraine
lying long above ground. Much people in small room lying vncleanly and
sluttishly.
Wind bringing wholesome air. North which prolongs life, by expulsing ill
vapours. East is temperate and lusty.

Wind bringing ill air. South corrupts and makes ill vapours. West is very
mutable, which nature doth hate.

Meates and drinks.
In meat and drink we must consider six things.
Substance. Quantity. Quality. Custom. Time. Order.
Substance, some is good, which makes good juice and good blood: some is ill,
and engenders ill juice and ill blood.

Meates and drinks making good juice.
Bread of pure flower, of good wheat somewhat uened, well baked, not too old,
nor too stale. Eggs of Fesants, Hens, Partriches, new laid, leapotched,
mean between rear and hard. Milk new milked drunk fasting, wherein is Sugar
or the leaves of mints. Fesants, Partriches or Chickens. Capons or Hens,
Birds of the fields. Fish of stony rivers, Ueale sucking. Pork young, Beef
not passing three years old. Pigeons, Uenison of red Dear. Peas pottage with
mints, Feet of swine or calves. Figs ripe, Bourage, Raisons.
before meals.
Languedebeefe, Parsley, Mints. Rice with Almond milk. Lattice, Cicorie,
Grapes. Wines good moderately taken, well fined. Ale and Beer six days old,
clean brewed and not strong. Mirth with gladness. The liver and brains of
Hens and Chickens, and young Geese.
Meates and drinks making ^ll juice.
Old beef, Old mutton, Geese old, Swan old. Ducks of the ^ell, Inwards of
beasts. Black puddings. The heart, liver, and kidneies of all beasts. The
brains and marow of the back bone. Wood cvluers, Shellfish, except Crevice de
eau dulce. Cheese hard, Apples and pears much used. Figs and grapes notripe.
All raw herbs, except Lattice, Borage and Cicorie. Onions, Garlic, Leekes,
Immoderatly used, specially in choleric stomachs.
Wine musty and sour. Fear, sorrow, pensiveness.
Meates engendering choler.
Garlic, Onions, Roket, ^ersis, Leekes, Mustard. Pepper, Honey, Wine much
drunken, Sweet meates.
Meates engendering fleume.
All slimy and cleaving meates, Cheese new. All fish, specially in a
fleumatike stomach. Inwards of beasts, Lambs flesh. The stnew parts of flesh,
Skins, Brains, Lungs. Rapes, Cucumbers, Repletion, Lack of exercise.
Meates engendering Melancholy.
Beef, Goats flesh, Hares flesh, Boars flesh. Salt flesh, Salt fish,
Coleworts. All pulse, except white peason, Browne bread course. Thick wine,
Black wine, Old cheese, Old flesh. Great fishes of the sea.
Meates making thick juice.
Rye bread musty, Bread without leaven, Cake bread. Sea fish great, Shell
fish, Beef the kidneis. The liver of a swine, The stones of beasts. Milk much
sodden, Rapes, All round roots. Cucumbers, Sweet wine, Deep red wine,
Garlic, Mustard, Origanum, Hysope, Basil, Fenell, Cheese, Eggs fried or
hard, Chestnuts, Nauewes. Figs green, Apples not ripe, Pepper, Roket.
Leekes, Onions, much used.
Meates which do hurt the teeth.
Very hot meates, Nuts, Sweet meates and drinks. Radish roots, Hard meates,
Milk, Bitter meates. Much vomit, Leekes, Fish fat, Limons, Coleworts.
Things hurtful to the eyes.
Drunkenness, Lechery, Must, All pulse. Sweet wines and thick wines,
Hempseede. Very salt meates, Garlic, Onions, Coleworts. Radish, Reading after
supper immediately.
Making great opilations.
Thick milk, All sweet things. Rye bread, Sweet wines.
Meates inflating or windy.
Beans, Lupines, Cicer, Mill, Cucumbers. All juice of herbs, Figs dry,
Rapes, Nauewes raw. Milk, Honey not well clarified, Must.
Things good for the head.
Cubebes, Galingale, Lignum aloes, Marioram. Balm mints, Gladen, Nutmegs,
Musk. Rosemary, Roses, Pyony, Hysope, Spike, Camomill. Mellilete, Few,
Frankincense.
Things good for the heart.
Cinamom, Saffron, Coral, Cloves, Lignum aloes, Pearls, Macis, Balm mints,
Myrabolanes, Musk, Nutmegs, Rosemary. The bone of the heart of the red Dear.
Marioram, Buglosse, Bourage, Setwall.
Things good for the Liver.
Wormwood, Withwind, Agrimonie, Saffron. Cloves, Endiue, Liuerwort, Cicorie,
Plaintaine. Dragons, Raisons great, Saunders, Fenell. Violets, Rose water,
Lattice.
Things good for the Lungs.
Elicampane, Hysope, Scabiose, Licorise, Raisons, Maidenhaire, Penidies,
Almonds, Dates, Pistaces.
Things good for the eyes.
Eyebright, Fenell, Ueruaine, Roses, Celendine. Agrimony, Cloves, Cold water.
Things good for the stomach.
Myrabolanes, Nutmegs, Organum, Pistaces. Quinces, Olibanum, Wormwood, Saffron,
Coral. Agrimony, Fumetorie, Galingale, Cloves. Lignum aloes, Mastix, Mint,
Spodium. The innermost skin of a Hens gysar. Coriander prepared.
The second Book of the Castle of Health.
Of quantity. CAP. 1.
THe quantity of meat must be portioned after the substance and quality
thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eats.

First it ought to be remembered, that meates hot and moist which are qualities
of the blood, are soon turned into blood, and therefore much nourishes the
body. Some meates do nourish but little, having little conformity with blood
in their qualities. Of them which do nourish: some are more gross, some
lighter in digestion. The gross meat engenders gross blood, but where it is
well concoct in the stomach and well digested, it makes the flesh more firm,
and the official mebers more strong then fine meates. Wherefore of men which
use much labour or exercise, also of them which have very choleric stomachs
here in England, gross meates may be eaten in a great quantity: and in a
choleric stomach, beef is better digested then a chickens leg, for as much
as in a hot stomach fine meates be shortly adust and corrupted. Contrariwise,
in a cold or fleumatike stomach gross meat abides long vudigested, and
makes putrified matter: light meates therefore to such a stomach be more apt
and convenient.

The temperate body is best nourished with a little quantity of gross
meates, but of temperate meates in substance and quality they may safely eat
a good quantity: foreseen always that they eat without gourmandise, or leave
without appetite. And here it would be remembered, that the choleric stomach
doth not desire so much as he may digest: the melancholy stomach may not
digest so much as he desires: for cold makes appetite, but natural heate
concocteth or boils. Notwithstanding, unnatural or supernatural heate
destroys appetite and corrupts digestion, as it appears in fevers.
Moreover, fruits and herbs, specially raw, would be eaten in a small
quantity, although the person be very choleric, for as much as they do
engender thin watery blood apt to receive putrification, which although it be
not shortly perceived of him that uses it, at length they feel it by sundry
diseases which are long in coming, and shortly sleieth, or be hardly escaped.
Finally, excess of meates is to be abhorred. For as it is said in the book
called Ecclesiasticus: In much meat shall be sickness, inordinate appetite
shall approach unto choler. Semblably the quantity of drink would be
moderated, that it exceed not, nor be equal unto the quantity of meat,
specially wine which moderately taken, aydeth nature, and comfort her: and as
the said author of Ecclesiasticus saith: Wine is a rejoicing to the soul and
body. And Theogines saith, in Galens work: A large draught of wine is ill, a
moderate draught is not evil, but commodious and profitable.

Of quality of meates. CAP. 2.
Quality is the complexio, that is to say, it is the state thereof, as hot,
cold, moist, or dry. And some meates be in winter cold in act, and in virtue
hot.

And it would be considered, that every complexion teperate and intemperate, is
coserued in his state, by that which is like thereto in form degree. But that
which exceeds much in distemperance, must be reduced to his temperance, by
that which is contrary to him in form or quality, but like in degree
moderately used. By form is understood grossenes, fineness, thickness, or
thinnes, by degree, as the first, the second, the third, the fourth in heate,
cold, moisture, or drith.

Of custom.
Custom in feeding is not to be contemned, or little regarded: for those
meates, to the which a man hath been of long time accustomed, though they be
not of substance commendable, yet do they sometime less harm then better
meates, whereunto a man is not used. Also the meates and drinks, which do much
delight him that eats, are to be preferred before that which is better, but
more unsavoury. But if ye custom be so pernicious, that it needs must be
left, then would it be withdrawn by little and little in time of health, and
not of sickness. For if it should be withdrawn in time of sickness, nature
should sustain treble detriment, first by the grief induced by sickness:
secondly, by receiving of medicines: thirdly, by forbearing the thing wherein
she delights.

Of the temperature of meates to be received. CAP. 4.
TO keep the body in good temper, to them whose natural complexion is moist,
ought to be given meates that be moist in virtue, or power: contrariwise to
them, whose natural complexion is dry, ought to be given meates dry in
virtue, or power. To bodies intemperate, such meates or drinks, which be in
power contrary to the distemperance, but the degrees are always to be
considered as well of the temperance of the body, as of the meates. For where
the meates do much exceed in degree the temperature of the body, they annoy
the body in causing distemperance. As hot wines, pepper, garlic, onyons, and
Salt, be noyfall to them which be choleric, because they be in the highest
degree of heate and drith above the just temperance of mans body in that
complexion. And yet be they oftentimes wholesome to them which be fleumatike.
Contrariwise, cold water, cold herbs, and cold fruits moderately used, be
wholesome to choleric bodies, by putting away the heate, exceeding the
natural temperature, and to them which be fleumatike they be unwholesome,
and do bring into them distemperance of cold and moist.

What distemperance happens by the excess of sundry qualities in meates and
drinks. CAP. 5.
Meates. Cold, do congeal and mortify. Moist, do putrefy and hasten age.
Dry, sucks up natural moisture. Clanmie, stops the issue of vapors and
urine, engenders rough fleume and gravel. Fat and oily swims long in ye
stomach, and brings in lothsomnes. Bitter, doth not nourish. Salt, do fret
much the stomach. Harrish, like the taste of wild fruits, do constipate and
restrain. Sweet chase the blood, and causes opilations or stoppings of the
pores and conduits of the body. Sower cools nature, and hastens age.

What commodity happens by the moderate use of the said quality of meates
and drinks. CAP. 6.
Meates. Cold asswageth the burning of choler. Moist, humecteth that which is
dried. Dry, consumes superfluous moisture. Clamy, thicketh yt which is subtle
piercing. Bitter, cleanses and wipes off, also mollifies and expels
fleume. Salt, relents fleume clammy, and dries it. Fat vnctuous, nourishes
makes soluble. Stiptike or rough on the tongue, binds and comfort
appetite. Sweet doth cleanse, dissolve, and nourish.

Of fruits. CAP. 7.
FOrasmuch as before that tillage of corn was invented, and that devouring of
flesh and fish was of mankind used, men undoubtedly lived by fruits, and
nature was there with contented and satisfied, but by change of the diet of our
progenitors, there is caused to be in our bodies such alteration, from the
nature which was in man at the beginning, that now all fruits generally are
noyfull to man, and do engender ill humours, and be oft times the cause of
putrified fevers, if they be much and continually eaten. Notwithstanding, unto
them which have abundance of choler, they be sometime convenient to repress
the fieume which proceeds of choler. And some fruits which be stiptike or
binding in taste, eaten before meals, do bind the belly, but eaten after
meals, they be rather laxative. Now shall it be expedient to write of some
fruits particularly, declaring their noyfull qualities in appearing of nature,
and how they may be used with least detriment.

Of Gourds.
GOurds raw be unpleasant in eating, ill for the stomach, Galen de ^imen. 2.
and almost never digested, therefore he that must needs eat them, must boyle
them, roast them, or fry them, every way they be without savour or taste, and
of their proper nature they give to the body cold and moist nourishment, and
that very little: but by reason of the slipperines of their substance, and
because al meates which be moist of their nature, be not binding, they lightly
pass forth by the belly. And being well ordered, they will be meetly concoct,
if corruption in ye stomach do not prevent them: they be cold and moist in
the second degree.

Of Melons and Pepons.
MElons and Pepons be almost of one kind, but that the Melon is round like an
Apple, and the innermost part thereof, where the seeds are contained, is used
to be eaten. The Pepon is much greater, somewhat long, and the inner part
thereof is not to be eaten. They both are very cold moist, and do make ill
juice in the body, if they be not well digested, but the Pepon much more then
the Melon, they do least hurt, if they be eaten before meals. Albeit if they
do find in the stomach fleume, they be turned into fleume: if they find
choler, they be turned into choler. Not withstanding, there is in them the
virtue to cleanse and to provoke urine: they be cold and moist in the second
degree.

Cucumbers.
CUcumbers do not exceed so much in moisture as Galen de alimen. 2.
Melons, and therefore they be not so soon corrupted in the stomach. But in
some stomachs, being moderately used, they do digest well: but if they be
abundantly eaten, or much used, they engender cold and thick humours in the
veins, which never or seldom is turned into good blood, and sometime brings
in fevers. Also they abate carnal lust. The seeds as well thereof, as of
Melons and Gourds, being dried and made clean from the husks, are very
medicinable against sicknesses proceeding of heate, also the difficulty or let
in pissing: they be cold and moist in the second degree.

Dates.
BE hard to digest, therefore being much eaten and not well digested, they
annoy the head, and cause gnawing in the stomach, and makes gross juice, and
sometime cause obstructions, or stoppings in the liver and spleen. And where
there is inflammation or hardness in the body they are unwholesome, but being
well digested and temperatly used, they nourish make the flesh firm, and also
binds the belly: old Dates be hot and dry in the first degree: new gathered
are hot and moist in the first degree.

Of Figs.
Figs eaten do shortly pass out of the stomach, and are soon distributed
into all the parts of the body, and have the power to cleanse specially
gravel, being in the rains of the back: but they make no substantial
nourishment, but rather somewhat loose and windy, but by their quick passage,
the wind is soon dissolved. Therefore if they be ripe, they do least harm
of any fruits, or almost none. Dry figs and old, are more hot and moist
than new gathered, but being much eat they make ill blood and juice, and as
some do suppose, do engender Lice: also annoys the liver and the spleen,
if they be inflamed: but having the power to attenuate or make humours currant,
they make the body soluble, and do cleanse the rains. Also being eaten before
dinner with ginger or pepper, or powder of Time, or Peniryall: they profit much
to them which have opilations or hard congealed matter in the inner parts of
the body, or have distillations or rewmes falling into the breast stomach. New
figs are hot and moist, old figs are hot in the first degree, and dry in
the second.

Of Grapes, and Raysons.
GRapes do not nourish so much as figs, but being ripe, they make not much
ill juice in the body: albeit newly gathered they trouble the belly, and
fills the stomach with wind, therefore if they be hanged up a while, ere
they be eaten they are the less noyfull. Sweet grapes, are hottest, and do
loose somewhat, and make a man thirsty. Sour grapes are cold, and do also
loose, but they are hard of digestion; and yet they do not nourish. They which
are in taste bitter or harrish, be like to them that are sour. Raysons do
make the stomach firm and strong, and do provoke appetite, and do comfort
weak bodies: being eaten before meals, they be hot in the first degree, and
moist in the second.

Of Cherries.
Cherries if they be sweet, the do soon slip down into the stomach, but if
they be sour or sharpe, they be more wholesome, and do loose: if they be eaten
fresh newly gathered, they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Peaches.
PEaches do less harm, and do make better juice in the body, for they are
not so soon corrupted being eaten: of the juice of them may be made a syrupe
very wholesome against the distemperance of choler, whereof proceeds a
stinking breath, they be cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Of Apples.
AL apples eaten soon after yt they be gathered, are cold, hard to digest, and
do make ill and corrupted blood, but being well kept until the next winter,
or the year following, eaten after meals, they are right wholesome, do
con^rme the stomach, make good digestion, specially if they be roasted or
baked, most properly in a choleric stomach: they are best preserved in honey,
so the one touch not an other. The rough tasted apples are wholesome, where the
stomach is weak by distemperance of heate or much moisture. The bitter
apples, where the grief is increased. The sour apples, where the matter is
congealed or made thick with heate: in distemperature of heate and dries by
drinking much wine, they have been found commodious being eaten at night going
to bed, without drinking to them: they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of Quinces.
QUinces be cold and dry: eaten before meals they bind and restrain the
stomach, that it may not digest well the meat, except that they be roasted or
sodden, the core taken out and mixed with honey clarified, or sugar, then they
cause good appetite, and preserves the head from drunkenness: taken after
meat, it closes and draws the stomach together, and helps il digestion,
and mollifies the belly, if it be aboundantlytaken, they be cold in the first
degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profitable to the stomach, specially they
which are sweet: but in a hot fever, they that are sour be more expedient
and wholesome, for than the sweet doth incende heate, and puff up the
stomach.

Of Pears.
Pears are much of the nature of apples, but they are heavier: but taken after
meals roasted or baken, they are not unwholesome, and do restrain and knit the
stomach being ripe: they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Medlars.
MEdlars are cold and dry, and constrictiue or straining the stomach, and
therefore they may be eaten after meals, as a medicine, but not used as
meat, for they engender melancholy: they be cold and dry in the second
degree.

Walnuts.
Walnuts, if they be blaunched, are supposed to be good for the stomach, and
somewhat loosing the belly: mixte with Sugar, they do nourish temperately. Of
two dry nuts, as many figs, and xx. leaves of few, with a grain of salt, is
made a medicine whereof if one do eat fasting, nothing which is venomous may
that day hurt him, and it also preserves against the ^, and this is the very
right Mithridate, they ^ in the second degree, after some opinion^ hot^ degree,
dry in the second.

Fiberd and hasell nuts.
THey be more strong in substance, the^, whereof they are not so easily or
soon dig^so they do inflate the stomach, and cause headache, but they
engender fat. And if they be roasted, the^ to restrain rewmes. Also eaten
with pepper, the^ ^ against torments of the belly, and the stopping of ^ They
be hot and dry in the first degree.

Of Almondes.
THey do extenuate and cleanse without any binding, wherefore they purge the
breast and lungs, specially bitter Almondes, also they do mollify the belly,
provoke sleep, and causes to peace well, 5, or 6. of them eaten before meat
keep a man from being drunk: they be hot and moist in the first degree.

Of Chestnuttes.
THey being roasted under the embers, or hot ashes, do nourish the body
strongly, and eaten with honey fasting, do help a man of the cough.

Of Prunes.
OF the garden and ripe, do dispose a man to the stool, but they do bring no
manner of nourishment. To this fruit like as to figs this property
remains, that being dried they do profit: the Damask prune rather binds
then loses, and is more commodious unto the stomach, they be cold and moist
in the third degree.

Olives.
COndite in salt licoure, taken at the beginning of a meal, doth corroborate
the stomach, stirs appetite and loses the belly being eaten with vinegar.
They which be ripe are temperately hot, they which be green are cold and dry.

Of Capers.
THey nourish nothing after that they be salted: but yet they make the belly
loose, and purges fleume, which is therein contained. Also stirs appetite
to meat and opens the obstructions, or stopping of the liver and spleen,
being eaten with oximel, before any other meat: they be hot and dry in the
second degree.

Orenges.
THe rindes taken in a little quantity do comfort the stomach wherein it
digests, specially condite with sugar, and taken fasting in small quantity.
The juice of Orenges having a tossed of bread put into it, with a little powder
of mints, sugar, and a little cinamome makes a very good sauce to provoke
appetite. The juice eaten with sugar in a hot fever, is not to be
discommended. The rynde is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second,
the juice of them is cold in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Herbs used in potage, or to eat. CAP. 8.
GEnerally all herbs raw, and not s^dden, d^ingender cold and watery juice, if
they be eaten customably or in abundance, albeit some herbs are more
comestible, and less harm unto nature, and moderarely used, makes merely
good blood.

Lattice.
AMong al hear bs none hath so good juice as lattice, for some men do suppose
that it makes abundance of blood, albeit not very pure or perfect: it doth set
a hot appetite: and eaten in the evening it provokes sleep: albeit, it
neither doth loose, nor bind the belly of his own property. It increases
milk in a woman's breast, but it abates carnal appetite, and much using
thereof hurts the eyesight. It is cold and moi^ temperately.

Colewortes and Cabages.
BEfore that avarice caused Merchants to fetch out of the East and South
parts of the world, the traffic of spice, and sundry drugs to content
the vnsaciable ness of wanton appetites: Colewortes for the virtues supposed
to be in them were of such estimation, that they were judged to be a
sufficient medicine against all diseases, as it may appear in the book of
wise Caro wherein he writes of husbandry. But now I will no modre remember,
than shall be required, in that which shall used as meat, and not pure
Medicine. The juice thereof hath virtue to purge: The whole leaves being half
sodden, and the water powered out, and they being put e^soones into hot water,
sodden until they be tender, so eaten they do bind the belly. Some do suppose
if they be eaten raw with vinegar before meat, it shall preserve the stomach
from surfeiting, and the head from drunkenness ^albeit, much using of them
dulls the sight, except the eyes be very moist. Finally, the juice that it
makes in the body, is not so commedable, as that which is engendered of
lattice. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Cycory or Suckory.
IT is like in operation to Lettise, and tempers choler wonderfully, and
therefore in all choleric fevers, the decoction of this herb, or the water
thereof stilled, is right expedient. Semblably the herb and root boiled with
flesh that is fresh, being eaten, keeps the stomach head in very good
temper. I suppose that Southistle and Denidelion be of like qualities, but not
so convenient to be used of them which are hole, because they are wild of
nature and more bitter, and therefore causes fastidiousnesse or lothsomenesse
of the stomach. It is cold and dry in the second degree.

Endiue and Scariole.
Be much like in their operations to Cicory, but they are more convenient to
medicine then to meat. Albeit Scariole called white Endiue, having the tops
of the leaves turned in, and laid in the earth, at the latter end of summer,
and covered, becomes white and cryspe, like to the great stalks of Cabage
lattice, which are in winter taken up and eaten. And to them that have hot
stomachs and dry, they be right wholesome, but being too much used or in very
great quantity, they engender the humour which makes the colic: they be
cold and moist in the first degree.

Mallowes.
ARe not cold in operation, but rather somewhat warm, Galen de alimen. 2.
and have in them a slipperines. Wherefore being boiled and moderately eat with
oil and vinegar, they make ^eetly good concoction in the stomach, and causes
the superfluous matter therein easily to pass, and cleanses the belly. It is
hot and moist in the first degree.

White beetes.
ARe also abstersiue and loses the belly, but much eaten annoieth the
stomach, but they are right good against obstructions or stopping of the
liver, if they be eaten with vinegar or mustard, like wise it helps ye
spleen. It is cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Purslaine.
Doth mitigate the great heate in all the in ward parts of the body, semblably
of the head and eyes, also it represses the rage of Uenus, but if it be
preserved in salt or brine, it heats and purges the stomach. It is cold in
the third degree, and moist in the second.

Charuayle.
It is very profitable unto the stomach, but it may not sustain very much
boiling, eaten with vinegar, it provokes appetite, also urine. The decoction
thereof drunk with wine cleanses the bladder.

Sorrel.
Being sodden it loses the belly. In a time of pestilence, if one being
fasting, do chew some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it
meruallously preserves from infections, as a new practiser called Gualnerius
doth write. And I my self have proved it in my household.

The seeds thereof brayed and drunk with wine and water, is the colic and
fretting of the guts: it stops (...), and helps the stomach annoyed with
rep^. It is told in the third degree and dry in the second.

Parsley.
Is very convenient to the stomach, and comfort appetite, and ^ the breath
sweet, the seeds and root makes vr^ well, and breaks the stone, dissolveth
winds: the (...) boiled in water, and thereof ^ell being made, it dissolveth
fleume, makes good digestion. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Fenell.
Being eaten the seed or root makes abundance of milk, likewise drunk with
P^sane or ale. The seed some what restrayneth flux, provokes to peace, and
mitigateth frettings of the stomach and guts, specially Galen simplici. de
medicamen. lib. aca. 7.
the decoction of the root, if the matter, causing fretting, be cold, but if
it be of a hot cause, the use thereof is dangerous for inflammation or
exulceration of the rains or bladder. It is hot in the third degree, and dry
in the first.

A^yseseede.
Makes sweet breath, provokes urine, and drives down things cleaning to
the raynes or bladder, stirs up courage, and causes abundance of milk. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Beans.
They make wind, howsoever they be ordered: the substance which they do make
is spungie, and not firm, albeit they be abstersiue, or cleansing the body,
they tarry long ere they be digested, and make gross juice in the body: but
if onyons be sodden with them, they be less noyfull.

Peason.
Are much of the nature of Beans, but they be less windy, and passes
faster out of the body: they be also abstersiue, or cleansing, specially
white peason, and they also cause m^tly good nourishing, the husks taken away.
And the broth wherein they be sodden, cleanses right well the rains and
bladder.

Rape roots, and Nauewes. CAP. 9.
THe juice made by them is very gross, and therefore being much eaten, if they
be not perfectly (...) in the stomach, they do make crude or raw ^ in the
^eines. Also if they be not well boiled, they cause winds, and annoy the
stomach, and make sometime ^gs: if they be well boiled first in clean water*
and that being cast away, the second time with fat flesh, they (...)rish much,
and do neither loose nor bind the belly. But Nauewes do not nourish so much
as Rapes, but they be even as windy.

Turnep^.
Being well boiled in water, and after with fat flesh, nourishes much,
augments the seed of man, provokes carnal lust. Eaten raw, they stir up
appetite to eat, being temperatly used, and be convenient unto the which have
putrified matter in their breasts or lungs, causing them to ^astly: but being
much and often eaten, they make raw juice and windsnes.

Parsneps and Carrets.
They do nourish with better juice then ye other roots, Ga^. simp. medica.
lib. 7.
specially Carrets, which are hot and dry, and expels wind.
Notwithstanding, much used they engender ill juice, but Carrets less then
Parsneps, the one and the other expels urine.

Radish roots.
Have the virtue to extenuate or make thin and also to warm. Also they cause
to break wind, to peace. Being eaten before meals, they let the meat that it
may not descend: but being eaten last, they make good digestion and loses the
belly, though Galenus write contrary. For I among diverse other, by experience
have proved it. Notwithstanding, they be un wholesome for them that have
continually the got or pain in the joints.

Garlic.
It doth extenuate and cut-grosse humours, and slimy, dissolveth gross
winds, and heats all the body: also opens the places which are stopped
generally where it is well digested in the stomach: it is wholesome to diverse
purposes, specially in the body, wherein is gross matter, or much cold
enclosed, if it be sodden until it loses his ^esse, it some what nourishes,
and yet loses his (...) ^te gross humours* being sodde^ (...), it profits
much against distillations from the head into the stomach.

Onyons.
Do also extenuate, but the long onyons more then the round, the red more then
the white, the dry more the they which be (...) also raw more then sodden, they
stir appetite to meat, and put away lothsomnes, and loose the belly, they
quicken sight, being eaten in great abundance with meat, they cause one to
sleep soundly.

Leekes.
Be of ill juice, and do make ^us dreams, but they do extenuate and
clensethe body, and also make it soluble, and provokes urine. Moreover, it
causes one to spit out easily the fleume which is in the breast.

Sage.
It heats, and some what binds, and therewith provokes urine, the decoction
of the leaves and branches being drunk. Also it stops bleeding of wounds,
being laid unto them. Moreover, it hath been proved that women, which have been
long time without children, and have drunk ten ounces of the juice of Sage,
with a grain of salt, a quarter of an hour before that they have companied
with their husbands, have conceived at that time. It is hot and dry in the
third degree, the using thereof is good against palsies.

Hysope.
Doth heate and extenuate, whereby it digests slimy fleume: being prepared
with figs, it purges fleume downward, with honey and water, upward: boiled
in vinegar it helps the toothach, if the teeth be washed there with. It is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Bourage.
Comfort the heart and makes one merry, eaten raw before meals, or laid
in wine that is drunk. Also it mollifies the belly and prepares to the
stool. It is hot and moist in the middle of the first degree.

Sauery.
Purges fleume, helps digestio, makes quick fight, provokes urine, and
stirs carnal appetite. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Roket.
Heats much, and increases the seed of man, provokes courage, helps
digestion, and somewhat loses. It is hot and moist in the second degree.

Time.
Dissolveth winds, breaks the stone, expels urine, and cease frettings.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Peniroyall.
Doth extenuate, heat, and deroit, it reforms the stomach oppressed with
steume, it doth recomfort the faint spirit, it expels melancholy by siege,
is medicinable against many diseases. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Towncresses.
Paulus discommendeth, saying, that it resists concecsion, and hurts the
stomach, and makes it juice in the body: taken as medicine, it helps many
diseases. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Rosemary.
Hath the virtue to heate, and therefore it insolueth humours congealed with
cold: it helps against palsres, falling sickness, old diseases of the breast,
torments or fretting, it provokes brine and sweat: it helps the cough, taken
with pepper and honey: it puts away tootach, the root being chewed, or the
juice thereof put into the tooth being burned, the fume thereof resists the
pestilence: the rind thereof sodden or burned, the fume received at the mouth,
stops the re^e which falls out of the head into the cheeks or throat,
which I my self have proved the green leaves ^rused, do stop the Hemer^oides,
if they be laid unto them. That hear^ is hot and dry in the third degree.

Spices growing out of this realm used in meat and drink. CAP. 10.
Pepper.
BLackepepper is hottest, and most dry, whitepepper is next, long pepper is
most temperate. The general property of all kinds of pepper is to heate the
body, but as Galen saith, it pe^reeth downward, and doth not spread into the
veins, it helps dige^sSpan^pulseth urine, and it helps against the
diseases of the breast, proceeding of cold. It is hot in the first degree, and
dry in the second.

Ginger.
Heats the stomach, and helps digestion, but it heats not so soon as
pepper: but afterward the heate remains longer, and causes the mouth to be
moist. Being green or well confectioned in sirupe, it comfort much the
stomach and head, and quickens remembrance, if it be taken in the morning
fasting. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Saffron.
Somewhat binds, heats and comfort the stomach, and the heart
specially, and makes good digestion, being eaten or drunken in a small
quantity. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Cloves.
Have virtue to comfort the sinews, also to consume and dissolve superfluous
humours. They be hot and dry in the third degree: sodden with milk, it
comfort the debility of nature.

Maces.
Dioscorides commedeth to be drunk against spitting of blood, and bloody
fluxes, excessive laxes. Paulus Aegineta adds to it, that it helps ye
col^ke. They be hot in the 2. degree, and dry in the 3. degree. (...) to the
stomach very commodious, taken in a little quantity.

Nutmegs.
With their sweet odour comfort dissolve, sometime comfort the power of the
sight, and also the brain in cold diseases, and is hot and dry in the second
degree.

Of Bread. CAP. 11.
BRead of fine flower of wheat, having no leaven, is slow of digestion, and
makes flimie humours, but it nourishes much: if it be leauened, it digests
sooner.

Bread having much bran, fills the belly with excrements, and nourishes
little or nothing, but shortly descends from the stomach. The mean between
both, sufficiently leauened, well moulded, and moderately baked, is the most
wholesome to every age. The greatest loaves do nourish most fast, for as much
as the fire hath not exhausted the moisture of them. Hot bread slowly passes.
Barley bread cleanses the body, doth not nourish so much as wheat, and makes
cold juice in the body.

Of Flesh. CAP. 12.
Beef of England to Englishmen, which are in health, brings strong
nourishing: but it makes gross blood, and engenders melancholy: but being of
young Oxen, not exceeding the age of four year, to them which have choleric
stomachs, it is more convenient then chickens, and other like fine meates.

Swines flesh.
Above all kinds of flesh in nourishing the body, Galen most commends Pork,
not being of an old Swine, and that it be well digested of him that eats it.
For it makes best juice, it is most convenient for young persons, and them
which have sustained much labour, and there with are fatigate, and become
weak. Young pigs are not co^fiended, before that they be one month old, for
they do breed much superfluous humours.

Lamb.
Is very moist and fle^atike, wherefore it is not convenient for aged men,
except that it be very dry roasted, nor yet for them which have in their
stomachs much fleume.

Mutton.
Galen doth not commend it, notwithstanding experience Galen de ali. men. 2.
proves here in this Realm, that if it be young, it is a right temperate
meat, and makes good juice: and therefore it is used more then any other
meat in all diseases. And yet it is not like good in all places, nor the
sheep which bears finest wool, is not the sweetest in eating, nor the most
tender. But I have found in some countries Mutton, which in whiteness,
tenderness, and sweetness of the flesh, might be well nigh compared to Kid, and
in digestion have proved as wholesome.

Kid and Veale.
Of Galen is commended next unto Pork: but some men do suppose, that in
health sickness they be much better then pork, the juice of the both being
more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beasts, which be dry Hippo.
de ratione victus. lib. 2. cap. 19. Plin. 28.
of their nature, the youngest be most wholesome: of them that are moist, the
eldest are least hurtful.

Hare, and Cony.
Makes gross blood, it dries and stops, but yet it provokes a man to
peace. Cony makes better and more pure nourishment, and is sooner digested
then Hare. It is well proved, that there is no meat more wholesome, or that
more clean firmly, and temperatly nourishes then Rabbits.

Dear red and fallow.
Hypocrates affirms, that the flesh of Harts Hinds to be ill juice, hard of
digestion and dry, but yet moves urine. Of fallow dear, he nor any other old
writer doth speak of, as I remember. I suppose, because there be not in all
the world, so many as be in England, where they consume a good part of the
best pasture in the Realm, and are in nothing profitable, saving that of the
skins of them is made better leather then is of Calves, the huting of them
being not so pleasant, as the huting of other venery or vermin, the flesh much
more unwholesome and unpleasant then of a red Dear, engendering melancholy, and
making many fearful dreams, and disposes the body to a fever, if it be
much eaten: notwithstanding the fat thereof (as some learned men have supposed)
is better to be digested then the lean.

Of Birds.
The flesh of all birds is much lighter, than the flesh of beasts, in comparison
most especially of those fowls which trust most to their woings, do breed in
high countries.

Capons, Hens and Chickens.
The Capon is above all other fowls praised: for as much as it is easily
digested, and makes little ordure, and much good nourishment. It is commodious
to the breast and stomach. Hens in winter are almost equal unto the Capon,
but they do not make so strong nourishment. Auicen saith, if they be roasted in
the belly of a Kid or Lamb, they will be the better. Chickens in summer,
specially if they be cockerels, are very convenient for a weak stomach, and
nourishes a little. The flesh of a Cock is hard of digestion, but the broth
wherein it is boiled, loses the belly: having sod in it Coleworts,
Polipodium, or Cartamus, it purges ill humours, and is medicinable against
gowtes, ioynt-ach, and fevers, which come by courses.

Fesaut.
Exceeds all fowls in sweetnessed and wholesomnes, and is equal to a Capon
in nourishing: but he is somewhat drier, and is of some men put in comparison,
mean between a Hen and a Partridge.

Partridge.
Of all fowls is most soonest digested, and hath in him much nutriment,
comfort the brain, and makes seed of generation, and revives lust, which
is abated.

Quails.
Although they be of some men commended, yet experience proves them to
increase melancholy, and are of small nourishing.

Larks.
Be as well the flesh as the broth very wholesome: eaten roasted, they do much
help against the colicke, as Dioscorides saith.

A Plouer.
Is slow of digestion, nourishes little, increases melancholy.

Black birds or ousyls.
Among wildfoule have the chief praise, for lightness of digestion, and that
they make good nourishment, and little ordure.

Sparrows.
Be hard to digest, and are very hot, and stirs up Venus, and specially the
brains of them.

Woodcockes.
Are of a good teperance, and meetly light in digestion.

Pygeons.
Be easily digested, and are very wholesome to them, which are fleumaticke, and
pure melancholy.

Goose.
Is hard of digestion, but being young and fat, the wings be easy to digest in
a whole stomach, and nourishes competently.

Duck.
Is hotter then goose, and hard to digest, and makes worse juice, saving the
brawns on the breast bone, and the neck, is better then the remnant.

Crane and Bustarde.
Crane is harde of digestion, and makes ill juice, but being hanged up long in
the air he is the less unwholesome. Bustard being fat, and kept without meat
a day or two before yt he be killed, to expulse his ordure, and then drawn and
hanged as the Crane is, being roasted or bake, is a good meat, nourishes well,
if he be well digested.

Hearon, Byttour, Shouelar.
Being young and fat, be lightlier digested then the Crane, and the Bittour
sooner then the Hearon. And the Shouelar sooner then any of them, but all those
fowls must be eaten with much Ginger or Pepper, and have good old wine drunk
after them, and so shall they be more easily digested, the juice coming of them
be ye less noiful.

The parts and members of birds and beasts. CAP. 13.
THe wings, brawns, and neck of geese, capons, hens, fesant, partridge, and
small birds being fat, are better then the legs in digestion, lighter in
nourishment. Of wildfoule pigeons, being fat, the legs are better then the
wings, the brawns of duck, teale and wigeon except, which is better to
digest then the residue.

The gysard or stomach.
Of a goose or hen, being fat with bran and milk, being well sodden or made in
powder, is good for the stomach, in makingit strong to digest, and nourishes
competetly.

The liver.
Of a capon, hen, fesaunt, or goose being made fat with milk mixed with their
meat is not only easy to digest, but also makes good juice, and nourishes
excellently. But the livers of beasts be ill to digest, passes slowly and
makes gross blood, but it is strong in nourishing.

The inward of beasts, as tripes and chitterlings.
The flesh of them is more hard to digest: and therefore although they be well
digested, yet make they not juice naturally sanguine or clean, but raw juice,
and cold, and it requires a long time to be converted into blood.

The lunges or lights.
Are more easy to digest then the liver, and less nourishes, but the
nourishment that it makes, is fleumaticke. Albeit the lunges of a fox, is
medicinable for them, which have sickness of the lunges.

The Spleen or Mylt.
Is of ill juice, for it is the chamber of melancholy.

The heart.
Is of hard flesh, and therefore is not soon digested, nor passes shortly, but
where it is well digested, the juice that it makes is not to be dispraised.

The brain.
Is fleumaticke, of gross juice, slow in digesting, noyous to the stomach,
but where it is well digested, it nourishes much.

Marow.
Is more delectable then the brain, it is ill for the stomach, but where it
is well digested, it nourishes much.

The stones and Vdders.
Being well digested, do nourish much, but ye stones are hotter with their
moistnes, the vdders cold fleumatick: they both do increase seed of
generation, but the blood made of the vdder, is better then that which comes
of the stones, except it be of calves lambs. Also the stones of cocks, makes
commendable nourishment.

The head.
The flesh thereof nourishes much, augments seed, but it is slow of
digestion, noyeth the stomach, but to them which use much exercise, it is
commendable.

Tongue.
Is of a spungy and sanguine substance, but the kernels and gristle which are
in the roots, if they be well digested they make good nourishment, if they
be not well digested they make fleume.

The feet.
Being well boiled and tender, in a hole stomach digests well and makes
good juice and passes forth easily. Galen commends the feet of swine, but I
have proved, that the feet of a young bullock tenderly sodden and laid in
sows two days or three, and eaten cold in the evening, have brought a
choleric stomach into a good digestion and sleep: and therewith hath also
expulsed salt fleume and choler: and this have I found in my self by often
experience, always foreseen that it may be eaten before any other meat
without drinking immediately after it.

Of fish generally. CAP. 14.
THe best fish after the opinion of Galen, is that which swims in a pure
sea, and is tossed and lift up with winds and sourges. The more calm that the
water is, the worse is the fish.

They which are in muddy waters, do make much fleume and ordure, taken in
fens and ditches be worst, being in rivers and swift, be sometime
commendable: Albeit generally all kinds of fish makes more thinner blood than
flesh, so that it doth much nourish, and it doth the sooner pass over by
vapours: to a hot choleric stomach, or in fevers, sometime they be
wholesome, being new, fresh, and not very hard in substance or slimy, hard fish
is hard of digestion: but the nourishment thereof is more firm, then that
which is soft: those which have much gross humours in them, are best powdered.

Of Butter. CAP. 15.
BUtter is also nourishing, and profits in them which have humours
superfluous, in the breast or lunges, and lacks riping and clensing of them,
specially if it be eaten with sugar or honey. If it be well salted, it heats
and cleanses the more.

Of Cheese. CAP. 16.
CHeese by the whole sentence of al ancient writers, lets digestion, and is
an enemy unto the stomach. Also it engenders ill humours, and breeds the
stone: the these which doth least harm is soft cheese reasonably salted,
which some men do suppose, nourishes much.

Of Eggs. CAP. 17.
Eggs of Fesants, hens, and partriches, he of all other meates most
agreeable unto nature, specially if they be new laid: if they be reere, they
do cleanse the throat and the breast. If they be harde, they be slow in
digestion: but being once digested, they do nourish much. Mean between reere
and hard, they digest conveniently, and nourish quickly. Eggs well poched, are
better then roasted. If they be fried hard, they be of ill nourishment, and do
make stinking fumes in the stomach, and do corrupt other meates, with whom
they be mingled.

They be most wholesome, when they be poched, and most unwholesome, when they be
fried. Dioscorides saith. If they besu^d warm, before any other meat, they
do heal the grietes of the bladder raynes made with gravel. Also sorenes of
the cheeks and throat, and spitting of blood: and they be good against
catarres or stilling out of the head into the stomach.

Of drinks, and first of water.
Undoubtedly water hath pre-eminence above all other licours, not only because
it is an element, that is to say, a pure matter, whereof al other licours have
their original substance, but also for as much as it was the very natural and
first drink to all manner of creatures.

Wherefore the saying of Pindarus the Poet was ever well allowed, which saith,
water is best. And one thing is to be well considered, that from the creation
of the world, until the universal deluge or flood, during which time men lived
8. or 9. hundred years, there was none other drink used nor know, but water.
Also the true followers of Pythagoras doctrine, drank onley water, and yet
lived, as Appollonius, other: and in the searching out of secret and mystical
things, their wits excelled. Moreover we have seen men and women of great
age, and strong of body, which never or very seldom drank other drink then
pure water. As by example in Cornwall, although that the country be in a very
cold quarter, which proves that if men from their infancy were accustomed to
none other drink but to water only moderately used, it should be sufficient to
keep natural moisture, to cause the meat that is eaten, to pierce and descend
into the places of digestion, which are the purposes that drink serves for.

But now to the qualities of water after the setence of ancient philosophers
and physicians. The rain water after the opinion of most men, if it be
received pure and clean, is most subtle and penetratiue, of any other waters:
the next is that, which issues out of a spring in the east, and passes
swiftly among great stones or rocks: the third is of a clean river, which
runs on great harde stones or peples. There he diverse means to try out
which is the best water* for yt which is lightest in poise or weight, is best.
Also that whereof comes least skim or froth when it doth boyle, also that
which will soonest be hot: Moreover dip linen clothes into sundry waters and
after lay them to dry, and that which is soonest dry, the water wherein it
was dipped is most subtle. After a great surfeit, specially taken with
superfluous eating of banqueting meats, cold water drunken is a general
remedy. Hypo. affirms yt in sharpe and fervent diseases, none other remedy
is to be required then water. And Galen will not that children should be let
from drinking of De ratione victus in morb. acutis. lib. 3.
water, but that when they seele themselves very hot after meals, and do
desire to drink water, specially of a clean fountain they should be suffered,
also Hippo saith: in such sickness whereas thou fear, lest the head should be
vehemently grieved, or the mind perished, there must thou give either water or
white wine allayed with much water. Not withstanding there be in water causes
of diverse diseases, as of swelling of the spleen and the liver, it also
flitteth and swims, and it is long or it pierces, in as much as it is cold
and slow in decoction, it loses not the belly nor provokes urine. Also in
this it is vicious, that of his proper nature it makes no ordure. Finally
always respect must be had to the person that drinks it, for to yongmen and
them that be hot of complexion, it doth less harm, and sometime it
profits, but to them that are feeble, old, fleumaticke, melancholy, it is
not convenient.

Of Wine. CAP. 19.
PLato the wisest of all Philosophers, doth affirm, that wine moderately
drunk, nourishes and comfort as well al the body as the spirits of man.
And therefore God did ordain it for mankind, as a remedy against the
incommodities of age, that thereby they should seem to return unto youth and
forget heaviness. Undoubtedly wine heats, and moysteth the body, which
qualities chiefly conserveth nature. And Galen of all wines commends that
which is yellow and clear, saying: that it is the hottest, and white wine
least hot.

And the colour mean between both, of semblable temperature. The yellow wine
which is the proper colour of very hot wines, to old men doth bring these
commodities. First it heats all their members, also it purges by urine the
watery substance of the blood. Moreover, the wines which be pale or yellow, and
full of substance do increase blood, and nourish the body, but for the more
part, old men have need of such wines which do provoke urine: for as much
as in them do abound watery excrementes, or superfluities, and they which do
tarry long in the belly be not apt for aged men. Black or deep red wines and
thick, do bind and congeal that which they do find in the body, and
although some of them do not long abide in the belly, yet they move not urine,
but rather withdraws: but yet they do harm to old men, for as much as they
do stop the conduits of the spleen, the liver and the rains: also gross
wines be best for them which desire to be fat, but it makes opilations: old
wine and clear is better for them that be fleumatick. Galen also prohibiteth
children to drink any wine, for as Galen de tuen* sani. lib. 1.
much as they be of a hot and moist teperature, and so is wine: and therefore it
heats and moisteth too much their bodies, and fills their heads with
vapours. Moreover he would, that young men should drink little wine, for it
shall make them prone to fury, and lechery, that part of the soul which is
called rationable, it shall make troublous and dull: not withstanding yet it is
sometime profitable to mitigate or expel ordure made of choler or melacholy.
Also it profits against drith, which happens in the substance of the body,
either by too much labour, or by ye proper temperature of age: for wine moisteth
nourishes that, which is too dry, also mitigateth and dissolveth the sharpnes
of choler, and purges it also by urine sweat. Finally as Theognes saith, much
drinking of wineis ill, but moderate drinking of wine is not only not ill, but
also commodious and profitable, which sentence is confirmed by Iesus Syrac, in
the book named Ecclesiasticus, saying: Wine moderately drunk rejoices both
the body soul. Wherefore to conclude this chapter, there is neither meat nor
drink, in the use whereof ought to be a more discreet moderation, then in
wine, considering that being good and drunk in due time and measure, it not
only conserveth natural radical moisture, whereby life endures, but also it
helps the principal members which belong to digestion, to do their office: on
the other part being ill or corrupt, or taken out of order and measure, it doth
contrary to all the premises, besides that it transforms a man or woman,
making the beastly. More of the qualittes of wine shall be touched hereafter
in the order of diet.

Of Milk. CAP. 20.
Milk is compact of three substances, cream, why, and cruddes. The most
excellent milk is of a woman, the milk of a cow is thickest, the milk of a
camel is most subtle, the milk of a goat is between cow milk camel milk.
Ewes milk is between cow milk asses milk. Also the milk of beasts feeding in
large pastures, and out of Fens and Marshes, is better then of them which
be fed in little closes or in watery grounds. In spring time milk is most
subtle, and milk of young beasts is bolsomer then of old. To children, old
men, and to them which be oppressed with melacholy, or have the flesh consumed
with a fever, thick milk is conueniet. And generally to al them which do not
feel the milk rise in their stomachs after that they have eaten it, and in
those persons it doth easily purge that, which is in ye belly superfluous. And
afterward it enters into the veins brings good nourishment: whosoever hath
an appetite to eat or drink milk, to the intent that it shall not arise or
obrayd in the stomach, let him put into a vessel, out of the which he will
receive it, a few leaves of mint, sugar, or pure honey, and into the vessel
cause the beast to be milked, and so drink it warm from the vdder, or else let
him do as Paulus Aegineta teaches, that is to say, boyle first the milk with
an east fire, and sees it after in hotter fire, and skim it clean, and with
a sponge dipped in cold water, take the clean away, which would be burned to
the vessel, then put into the milk salt and sugar, Orbasitus, de conuictione
cibornm lib. 3.
and stir it often. Moreover, milk taken to purge melonchaly, would be
drunk in the morning abundantly, new milked, as is before written. And he that
drinks, should abstain from meat and exercise until the milk be digested,
and have some what purged the belly. For which labour it becomes sour: and
therefore it requires rest and watch, or to walk very softly. Finally, where
men and women be used from their childhood, for the more part, to milk, and to
eat none or little other meat but milk and butter, they appear to be of
good complexion and fashion of body, and not so much vexed with sickness as
they which drink wine or ale: not withstanding, much use of milk in men
sanguine or choleric, doth engender the stone.

Of Ale, Beer, Cider, and Why. CAP. 21.
I Can neither hear nor read, that Ale is made and used for a common drink
in any other country then England, Scotland, Ireland, and Pole. The Latin
word Ceruisia is indifferent as well to Ale as to Beer. If the corn be good,
the water wholesome and clean, and the Ale or Beer well perfectly brewed and
cleansed, and by the space of six days and more, settled and defecate, it must
needs be a necessary convenient drink as well in sickness as in health:
considering the barley corn, whereof it is made, is commended used in medicine
in all parts of the world, accounted to be of a singular efficacy in reducing
the body into good temper, specially which is in distemperature of heate. For
what ancient Physician is there that in his works comendeth not Ptisane? which
is none other but pure barley brayd in a mortar, sodden in water, the same thing
is small and clean ale or beer, saving that perchance the drying of the malt
is cause of more drith to be in the ale then in Ptisane. And the hops in Beer
makes it colder in operation. But to say as I think, I suppose that neither
Ale nor Beer is to be compared to Wine, considering that in them do lack the
heate and moisture which is in Wine. For that being moderately used, is most
like to the natural heat moisture of mans body. And also the liquor of Ale or
Beer being more gross, do engender more gross vapours and corrupt humours
then Wine doth, being drunk in like excess of quantity.

As for Cider may not be good in any condition, considering as I said, that al
fruits do engender ill humours, and do cool too much natural heate: but to
them which have abundance of red choler, moderately used, it somewhat profits
in mitigation of excessive heat. But who that will diligently mark in the
countries where Cider is used for a common drink, the men and women have the
colour of their visage palled, and the skin of the visage rivaled, although
that they be young.

Why, if it be left of the butter, being well ordered, and not drunk until
it have a thick curd of milk over it, like to a hat, is a right temperate
drink, for as much as by the vnctuositie of the butter, whereof the why
retains some portion, it is both moist nourishing, and cleanses the breast,
by the subtilnes of it self, it descends soon from the stomach, and is
shortly digested. Also by reason of the affinity which it hath with milk, it
is couertible into blood and flesh, specially in those persons which do
inhabit in the North parts, in whom natural heat is conglutinate, and
therefore is of more puissance and virtue in the office of concoction. Also
custom from childhood, doth elevate the power of meates drinks in their
disposition, notwithstanding that the 4. humours, sanguine, choler, fleume,
melancholy, must also be considered, as it shall appear in diverse places
hereafter.

Of Honey. CAP. 22.
Honey as well in meat as in drink, is of incomparable efficacy: for it not
only cleanses, alters, and nourishes, but also it long time preserves that
uncorrupted, which is put into it, in so much, as Pliny saith: such is the
Plin. lib. 22.
nature of honey, yt it suffers not the bodies to putrefy: and he affirms
that he did see an Hippocentaure, which is a beast half a man half a horse,
brought in honey to Claudius the Emperor, out of Egypt to Rome. And he tells
also of Pollio Romulus, who was above a hundred years old, of whom Augustus
the Emperor demanded by what means he lived so long, and retained still the
vigour or liuelines of body and mind. Pollio answered, that he did it inward
with Mead, which is drink made with honey and water: outward, with oil.
Which saying agrees with the sentence of Democritus the great Philosopher, who
being demanded, how a man might live long in health: he answered. If he wet
him within with honey, without with oil. The same Philosopher when he was an
hundred years old and nine, prolonged his life certain days with the
evaporation of honey, as Aristoxinus writes. Of this excellent matter, most
wonderfully wrought and gathered by a little Be, as well of the pure dew of
heaven as of the most subtle humour of sweet and virtuous herbs flowers, be
made licours commodious to mankind, as Mead, Metheglin, and Oximel. Mead
which is made with one part of honey, and four times so much of pure water,
boiled until no skim do remain, is much commended of Galen, drunk in summer
for preserving of health. Lib. 4. de tuenda sanitate.


The same author always commends the using of honey, either raw eaten with
fine bread somewhat leauened, or sodden, and received as drink. Also Mead
perfectly made, cleanses the breast and lungs, causes a ma to spit easily and
peace abundantly, and purges the belly moderately. Metheglin, which is most
used in Wales, by reason of hot herbs boiled with honey, is hotter then Mead,
and more comfort a cold stomach, if it be perfectly made, and not new or
very ^ale. Oximel, is where to one part of vinegar is put double so much of
honey, four times as much of water, and the being boiled unto the thirdpart,
and clean skimmed with a feather, is used to be take where in the stomach is
much fleume or matter vndigested, so that it be not red choler. Look the use
thereof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other good qualities of honey I omit to
write of, until some other occasion shall happen to remember them
particularly, where they shall seem to be profitable.

Sugar. CAP. 23.
OF Sugar I do find none ancient author of Greekes and Latines to write by
name, but only Paulus Aegineta, who saith in this wise, after that he hath
treated of honey. Moreover, sugar which they call honey, that is brought to us
from Arabia, called Felix, is not so sweet as our honey, but is equal in
virtue, and doth not annoy the stomach, nor causes thirst. These be the words
of Paulus. It is now in daily experience, that sugar is a thing very temperate
and nourishing, and where there is choler in the stomach, or that the stomach
abhors honey, it may be used for honey in all things, wherein honey is
required to be. With sugar and vinegar is made syrupe acetose.

Of time. CAP. 24.
IN the consideration of time, for taking of meates and Wint^r.
drinks, it is to be remembered, that in Winter meates ought to be taken in
great abundance, of a more gross substance then in Summer, for as much as the
exterior air which compasses the body being cold, causes the heate to
withdraw into the inner parts, where being enclosed and gathered nigh together
in the stomach and entrails, it is of more force to boyle and digest that
which is received into it. Also meates roasted are then better then sodden, and
flesh fish powdered, is then better then in Summer: herbs be not then
commendable, specially raw, neither fruits, except Quinces roasted or baked:
drink should be then taken in little quantity. Moreover, wines shall need no
water or very little, that to choleric persons: red wines, they which be thick
and sweet, may be then most surely taken of the which have no opilations or ye
stone: always remember that in winter ^eume increases by reason of rain and
moystures of the season, also the length of nights and much rest. And therefore
Gal in comment. in apho. z. lib. 3.
in that time choleric persons are best at ease, semblably are young me, but to
old men winter is an enemy. It begins the 8. day of November, and endures
until the 8. day of February.

The Spring time doth participate the first part with Spring time.
Winter, the latter part with Summer. Wherefore if the first part be cold, then
shall the diet be according to Hippocra. de natura humana.
Winter. If the end be hot, then shall the diet be of Summer. If both parts be
temperate, then should there be also a temperance in diet: always considering
that fleume yet remains, and blood then increases. And meat would be less
in quantity then in Winter, and drink Galen com. aph. 18. lib. 1.
somewhat more.

Spring time begins the 8. of February, continues Summer.
unto the 8. day of May. In Summer the inward heat is but little, and the
stomach doth not digest so strongly nor quickly, as in winter: wherefore in ye
season, eating often, and a little at once, is most convenient. And Damascenus
saith, that fasting in summer dries the body, makes the colour salow,
engenders melancholy, hurts the sight: also boiled meat, bread steeped in
white broth, with sodden lettise or cicorie, are then good to be Hippo. de
humoribus.
used: also variety in meates, but not at one meal: potages made with cold
herbs, drink in more abundance, wine alaid with water to hot complexions
much, to cold natures less. In this season blood increases, toward the end
thereof, choler. And therefore they which be cold of nature and moist, are then
best at ease, hot natures dry worst. Moreover* children and very young men in
Galen in comment in apho.
the beginning of summer, are holest, old folk in ye latter end, and in
Harvest. Summer begins the 8. day of May, continues until the 8. day of
August. Autumn begins the 8. day of August, and ends the 8. day of
November, that season of the year is variable, the air changeable, by occasio
whereof happen sundry sicknesses, blood decreases, melancholy abounds:
wherefore all summer fruits would then be eschewed, for as much as they make
ill juice winds in ye body. In this time meat would be more abundant the in
summer, but somewhat drier: drink must be less in quantity: but less mixed
with water. This time is dagerous to al ages, al natures, al countries, but ye
natures hot moist be least in damage.

Diet concerning sundry times of the year, written by the old Physician
Diocles, to King Antigonus.
FRom the 12. day of December, at the which time the day is at the shortest
until the 9. day of March, which do continue 90. days, rheumes and moystures
do increase, then meates and drinks naturally very hot, would be moderately
used. Also to drink abundantly Wine without allay, or with little water, and to
use hilaritie: the company of a woman is not unwholesome to the body.

From the ninth day of March, at which time in Equinoctium vexnum unto the 25.
day of April, sweet fleume and blood do increase: therefore use thou things
having much juice and sharpe, exercise the body diligently, then may ye use
safely the company of a woman.

From the 20. day of April, to the 14. day of June, choler increases, then
use all things that are sweet, and do make the belly soluble, forbear
carnal company with women.

From the 14. day of June, at which time ye day is at ye longest, unto the 12.
day of September, doth melancholy rain, forbear carnal company, or use it
moderately.

From the 12. day of September, unto the 17. day of October, do abound fleume
thin humours, then would all fluxes and distillations be prohibited, then all
sharpe meates and drinks and of good juice, are to be used, and carnal
occupations should then be eschewed.

From the 17. day of October, to the 12. day of December, increases gross
fleume, use therefore all bitter meates, sweet wines, fat meat, and much
exercise.

Of Ages. CAP. 25.
CHildren would be nourished with meats and drinks, Children.
which are moderately hot and moist, notwithstanding Galen doth prohibit them
use of Wine, because it Galen de tuen. ^anit. lib. 1.
moystneth and heats too much the body, and fills the heads of them, which
are hot and moist, with vapours. Also he permits them in hot weather to
drink clear water of the fountain. A child growing fast in his mebers toward
a man, so that he seems well fed in the body, is then to be feared of fulness
of humours, and if it be Orba^itus, de ^ute simp. lib. 1
perceived that he is replete, then must be withdrawn minished some part of
that nutrimet, and according unto his age, some evacuation would be devised,
otherwhile by exercise, walking up and down fasting, and before that they eat
any meat, let them exercise themselves with their own labours, do their own
accustomed business, and eat the meates whereunto they be most used, so that
it be such that may not hurt them. And thus need they not to know of
Physicians, but by experience and diligent search by their stool, their nurses
shall perceive what digests well, and what doth not. But if it appear that
by excessive feeding, the belly of the child is fuller and greater the it was
wont to be, and that which passes by the belly is corrupted, or his sweat
stinks, these things known, if they eat strong meates, give them not one
kind of meat, but diverse, that the novelty of the meat may help, that they
may go the more easily to the stool. For if any have an unreasonable
appetite, he is sooner recovered, if he be purged by a boyle or impostume,
come forth broken, before that the meat be corrupted, after that let him eat
fine meats, being once whole, return by little little to his old custom.

Young men, exceeding the age of 14. years, shall eat meat more gross of
substance, colder and moyster, also Young men.
Salads of cold herbs, and to drink seldom Wine, except it be alayd with
water. Albeit, all these things must be tempered according to their
complexions, exercise, and quietness in living, whereof ye shall read in their
proper places hereafter.

Old men, in whom natural heate and strength seems Old men.
to decay, should use always meates, which are of quality hot and moist, and
there withal easy to be digested, and abstain utterly from all meates and
drinks which will engender thick juice and slymy, semblably from wine, which
is thick, sweet, and dark red wines, and rather use them which will make
thin humours, and will purge well the blood by urine, therefore white or
yellow wines, and perchance french claret wines, are for them very commendable.
Also wine prepared with Paul. A Eginer. lib. 1. cap. 23.
pure honey clarified, wherein roots of parsley, or fenell be steeped,
specially if they suspect any thing of the stone, or gout. And if they more
desire to cleanse their rains and bladder, then it is good to use small white
wine, as racked rhenish wine, or other like to it. And sometime to steep over
night therein a parsley root flit and somewhat bruised, and a little licorice.
Finally, let them beware of all meates that will stop the pores, and make
obstructions Opilations, what they are.
or opilations, that is to say, with clammy matter stop the places where the
natural humours are wrought and digested, the which meates I have before set in
a table. But if it chance then to eat any such meat in abundance, let them
take shortly such things, as do resist Opilations, or resolve them. As white
pepper, bruised and mixed with their meates or drinks, garlic also or onyons, if
they abhor them not. Always remember that aged men should eat often, and but
little at every time, for it fares by them, as it doth by a lamp, the light
whereof is almost extinct, which by pouring in of oil little and little is long
kept burning: and with much oil poured in at once, it is clean put out. Also
they must forbear all things which do engender melancholy, whereof ye shall
read in the table before: and bread clean without eauen, is not then
unwholesome.

Moderation in dier, having respect to the strength or weakness of the person
CAP. 26.
NOw here it must be considered, that although I have written a general diet
for every age, yet nevertheless it must be remembered, that some children and
young men, either by debility of nature, or by some accidental cause, as
sickness or much study, happen to gather humours fleumaticke or melancholy in
the places of digestion, so that concoction or digestion is as weak in them, as
in those which are aged.

Semblably some old men find nature so beneficial unto them, that their
stomachs and livers are more strong to digest then the said young men: some
perchance have much choler remaining in them. In these cases the said young
men must use the diet of old men, or nigh unto it, until the discrasie be
removed, having always respect to their universal complexions, as they which
are naturally choleric to use hot things in a more temperance, then they
which be fleumaticke or melanch^licke by nature. The same observation shall be
to old men, saving that age of his own property is cold and dry, therefore
the old man that is choleric, shall have more regard to moisture in meates
then the young man being of the same complexion. Foreseen always that where
nature is offended or grieved, she is cured by that, which is Hippoc. aphor.
Galen in comment.
contrary to that, which offends or grieves, as cold by heate, heate by
cold, drith by moisture, moisture by drith. In that whereby nature should be
nourished in a whole and temperate body, things must be taken which are like to
the mans nature in quality and degree. As where one hath his body in a good
temper, things of the same temperance doth nourish him: but where he is out of
temper, in heate, cold, moisture or dryth, temperate meates or drinks nothing
do profit him. For being out of the mean and perfect temperature, nature
requires to be thereto reduced by contraries, remembering not only, that
contraries are remedy unto their contraries, but also in every contrary,
consideration must be had of the proportion in quantity.

Times in the day concerning meals. CAP. 27.
BEsides the times of the year, and ages, there be also other times of eating
and drinking to be remembered, as the sundry times in the day, which we call
meals, which are in number and distance, according to the temperature of the
country and person. As where the country is cold, and the person lusty, and
of a strong nature, there may more meals be used, or the less distance of
time between them. Contrariwise in contrary countries and personages, the
cause is before rehearsed, where I have spoken of the diet of the times of the
year, notwithstanding, here must be also consideration of exercise and rest,
which do augment or aspire the natural disposition of bodies, as shall be
more declared hereafter in the chapter of exercise. But concerning the general
usage of countries, and admitting the bodies to the perfect state of health, I
suppose that in Englande young men, until they come to the age of xl. years,
may well eat three meals in one day, as at breakfast, dinner, and supper, so
that between breakfast and dinner, be the space of 4. hours, at the least
between dinner and supper 6. hours, and the breakfast less then the dinner,
the dinner moderate, that is to say, less then sacietie of fulness of belly,
and the drink thereunto measurable, according to the drines or moistnes of the
meat. For much abundance of drink at meal, drowns the meat eaten, and
not only lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but also causes it to
pass farther then nature requires, and therefore engenders much fleum,
consequently rewmes, crudenes in the veins, debility and slippernes of the
stomach continue flux, and many other inconveniences to the body and
members. But to return to meals, I think breakfasts necessary in this
realm, as well for the causes before rehearsed, as also for Breakfast.
as much as choler being fervent in the stomach, sends up fumosities into
the brain, and causes headache, and sometime becomes adult, and smauldreth
in the stomach, whereby happens perilous sickness, and sometime sudden death,
if the heate enclosed in the stomach have not other convenient matter to work
on: this daily experience proves, and natural reason confirms, therefore
men and women not aged, having their stomachs clean without putrified matter,
sleeping moderately and soundly in the night, and feeling themselves light in
the morning and sweet breathed, let them on Gods name break their fast,
choleric men with gross meat, men of other complexion with lighter meat,
foreseen that they labour some what before, semblably their dinner and supper,
as I have before written, so that they sleep not incontinent after their
meals: and here I will not recite the sentences of authors, which had never
experience of English men's natures, or of the just temperature of this realm
of England, only this connsaile of Hippocrates shall be sufficient. We ought
to grant somewhat to time, Hippo. hor. 18. lib. 1 Gal. de tuenda sanitate.
to age, and to custom: notwithstanding where great warmenes or dryth grieves
the body, there ought the dinner to be less, and the longer distance between
dinner, and supper. Also much rest, except a little soft walking, that by an
upright moving, the meat being stirred may descend. This is always to be
remembered, that where one feels himself full and grieved with his dinner, or
the savour of his meat by eructation ascends, or that his stomach is weak by
late sickness or much study, then it is most convenient to abstain from supper,
and rather provoke himself to sleep much, then to eat or drink any thing.
Also to drink between meals is not laudable, except very great thirst
constrains: for it interrupts the office of the stomach in concoction, and
causes the meat to pass faster then it should do, and the drink being
cold, it rebukes natural heate that is working, and the meat remaining
raw, it corrupts digestion and makes crudenesse in the veins. Wherefore he
that is thirsty, let him consider the occasion. If it be of salt fleume, let
him walk fair and softly and only wash his mouth and his throat with barley
water, or small ale, or lye down and sleep a little, and so the thirst will
pass away or at the least be well assuaged.

If it happen by extreme heate of the air, or by a pure choler, or eating of
hot Spices, let him drink a little Julep made with clean water and sugar, or a
little small beer or ale, so that he drink not a great glut, but in a little
quantity, let it still down softly into his stomach as he sits, then let him
move suddenly. If ye thirst be in yt evening by eating too much, and drinking
of wine, then after the opinion of the most learned physicians, and as I my
self have oft experienced the best remedy is, if there be no fever, to drink
a good draught of cold water immediately, or else if it be not painful for him
to vomit, to provoke him thereto with a little warm water, and after to wash
his mouth with vinegar and water, and sleep long and soundly if he can.

And if in the morning he feel any fumosities rising, then to drink Julep of
violets, or for lack thereof a good draught of very small ale, or beer
somewhat warmed, without eating any thing after it.

Of diversities of meates eaten, whereby health is appayred. CAP. 28.
NOw let this be a general rule, that sundry meates, being diverse in
substance and quality, eaten all at one meal, is the greatest enemy to
health that may be, and that engenders most sicknesses, for some meates being
gross and harde to digest, some fine and easy to digest, do require diverse
operations of nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach, that is to say,
much heate and temperate heate, which may not be together at one time.

Therefore when the fine meat is sufficiently boiled in the stomach, the
gross meat is raw, so both iuyces, the one good and perfect, the other gross
and crude, at one time digested, and sent into the veins and body, needs
must health decay, and sicknesses be engendered. Likewise in diverse meates
being of diverse qualities, as where some are hot and moist, some cold and
moist, some hot and dry, some cold and dry, according thereunto shall the juice
be diverse which they make in the body. And like as between the said qualities
is contrariety, so thereby shall be in the body an unequal temperature, for
as much as it is not possible for a man to esteem so just a proportion, of the
qualities of that which he receives, that the one shall not exceed the other
in quantity.

Wherefore of the said unequal mixture, needs must ensue corruption and
consequently sickness, and therefore to a hole man, it were better to feed at one
meal competently on very gross meat only, so that it be sweet, and his
nature do not abhor it, then on diverse fine meates of sundry substance and
qualities. I have known and seen old men and old women which eating only
beef, baken, cheese, and curdes, have continued in good health, whom I have
proved, that when they have eaten sundry fine meates at one meal, have soon
after felt themselves grieved with frettings, and headache, and after that they
have been hole again, there hath been given to them one kind of light
meat, they have done as well therewith as they were wont to do with gross meats,
when they eat it alone, which proves to be true that which I have rehearsed.
And it is good reason, for after the general opinion of Philosophers and
Physicians, the nature of mankind is best content with things most simple and
vnmixte, all things tending to unity, wherein is the only perfection. Also
it is a general rule of physic, that where a sickness may be cured with
simples, that is to say, with one only thing that is medicinable, there should
the Physician give no compound medicine mixte with many things.

These things considered, it may seem to all men that have reason, what abuse
is here in this realm in the continual gourmandise and daily feeding on
sundry meats at one meal, the spirit of gluttony triumphing among us, in his
glorious chariot called welfare, driving us from him, as his prisoners into his
dungeon of surfeit, where we are tormented with catars, fevers, gouts,
pluresies, fretting of the guts, and many other sicknesses, and finally put
to death by them, oftentimes in youth, or in the most pleasant time of our
life, when we would most gladly live, for the remedy whereof howe many times
have there been devised ordinances, and acts of counsel, although
perchance bodily health was not the chief occasion thereof, but rather
provision against vain and sumptuous expenses of the mean people. For the
nobility was exempted and had liberty to abide still in the dungeon if they
would, and to live less while then other men. But when, where, and how long
were the said good devises put in due execution, for all that, that thereof
should succeed double profit, that is to say, health of body, and increase of
substance, by eschewing of superfluous expeces in sundry dishes. Alas how long
will men fantasy laws and good ordinances, and never determine them. Fantasy
proceeds of wit, determination of wisdom, wit is in the devising and
speaking, but wisdom is in the performance, which rests only in
execution. Here have I almost forgotten, that my purpose was to write of the
order of diet, and not of laws: but the fervent love that I have to the
public weal of my country, constrained me to digress some what from my
matter, but now will I proceed forth to write of order which in taking of
meates and drinks is not the least part of diet.

Of order of receiving of meates, and drink. CAP. 29.
Herbs as well sodden as vnsodden, also fruits which do mollify and loose
the belly, ought to be eaten before any other meat, except that sometime for
the repressing of fumosities rising in the head by much drinking of wine, raw
lattice, or a cold apple, or the juice of Orenges or Lymons, may be taken
after meals in a little quantity.

Moreover all breathes, milk, reere eggs and meates which are purposely taken
to make the belly soluble, would first be eaten. Al fruits and other meates
that are stiptike or binding, would be eaten last after all other. Fruits
confectionate specially with honey, are not to be eaten with other meates.
But here is to be diligently noted, that where the stomach is choleric and
strong, gross meates would be first eaten, where the stomach is cold or
weak, there would fine meates be first eaten: for in a hot stomach fine
meates are burned, while the gross meat is digesting. Contrariwise in a cold
stomach, the little heate is suffocate with gross meat, and the fine meates
left raw, for lack of concoction, where if the fine meat be first taken
moderately, it stirs up and comfort natural heate, and makes it more
able to concoct gross meates, if they be eaten afterward, so that it be but
in small quantity, notwithstanding, as I lately affirmed one manner of meat is
most sure to every complexion, foreseen that it be always most commonly in
conformity of qualities with the person ye eats. Moreover take heed that
slipper meates be not first eaten, least it draw with it too hastily other
meates, ere they be digested, nor yt stiptike or restraining meates, be taken
at the beginning, as Quinces, Pears, Meddlers, lest they may let other meats
that they descend not into the bottom of the stomach where they should be
digested, notwithstanding the confection made with the juice of Quinces, called
Diacitonites, taken two hours before dinner or supper, is commended of Galen
and other for restoring appetite and making good concoction. Also concerning
drink at meals, it would not be before that Drink at meals.
somewhat were eaten, and at the beginning the drink would be strongest, and
so toward the end more small, if it be ale or beer, and if it be wine more and
more alayd with water: and after the better opinion of Physicians, the drink
would rather be mixed with the meat by sundry little draughts, the with one
great draught at the end of the meal: for the mixture tempers well the
meat without annoyance, a great draught with much drink drowns the meat,
rebukes natural heat that then works in cocoction, and with his weight
drives down the meat too hastily. Hot wines and sweet, or confectioned with
spices, or very strong ale, or beer, are not convenient at meals: for the
meat is by them rather corrupted then digested, and they make hot stinking
vapours ascend up to the brains. Albeit if the stomach be very windy, or so
cold and feeble, that it cannot concoct such a quantity of meat as is
required to the sufficient nourishment of the body of him that eats, or hath
eaten raw herbs or fruits, whereby he feels some annoyance, then may he
drink incontinent after his meal, a little quantity of secke, or good Aqua
vitae, in small ale: but if he have much choler in his stomach, or a head full
of vapours, it were much better that he did neither drink the one nor the
other, but rather eat a little coliander seed prepared, or a piece of a
Quince roasted, or in Marmelade, and after rest to amend the lack of nature
with sleep, moderate exercise, plasters providing for comforting of the
stomach. And here will I leave to write any more of the diet of eating
drinking, saving that I would, that the readers should have in remembrance
these two counsels. First, that to an hole man, to practise a rule is not
convenient in diet, and that the diseases which do happen by too much
abstinence, are worse to be cured, then they which come by repletio. And
Cornelius Celsus saith, a man that is hole and well at ease, and at his
liberty, ought not to bind himself to rules or need a Physician: but yet
where the stomach is feeble, as is of more part of the citizens, and well-nigh
all they that be studious in learning or weighty affairs, there ought to be
more circumspection, that the meat may be such as yt either in quality or
quantity, nature being but feeble, be not rebuked or too much oppressed.

Of sleep and watch. CAP. 30.
THe commodity of moderate sleep appears by this, that natural heat which
is occupied about that matter, whereof proceeds nourishment, is comforted in
the places of digestion, and so digestion is made better or more perfect by
sleep, the body fatter, the mind more quiet and clear, the humours
temperate, and by much watch all things happen contrary.

The moderation of sleep must be measured by health and sickness, by age, by
time, by emptines or fulness of the body, and by natural complexions. First to
a hole man, having no debility of nature, and digesting perfectly the meat
that he eats, a little sleep is sufficient: but to them which have weak
stomachs, and do digest slowly, it requires that sleep be much longer,
semblably temperance is required in youth and age: winter and summer, ye body
being full of ill humours, very little sleep is sufficient, except the humours
be crude or raw, for the is sleep necessary, which digests them better then
labour, semblably where the body is long empty, by long sickness, or
abstinence, sleep comfort nature as well in the principal members, as in all
the other. Also regard must be had to the complexion, for they that are hot and
do eat little and digest quickly, a little sleep serves, specially to
choleric persons, for in them much sleep augments heate, more then is
necessary, whereby hot fumes inflammations are often engendered, sometime the
natural choler is adust or putrified, as experience teaches. Fleumatike
persons are naturally inclined to sleep: because they engender much humours,
they require more sleep then sanguine or choleric. Persons having natural
melancholy, not proceeding of choler adust, do require very much sleep, which
in them coforteth the powers animal, vital natural, which ye may find written
in the tables preceding. Sleep would be taken not immediately after meals,
before that yt meat is descended fro the mouth of the stomach. For thereby is
engendered pains noise in the belly, and digestion corrupted, the sleep by ill
vapours ascending, made unquiet troublous. Moreover, immoderate sleep makes
the body apt unto palsies, apoplexies, falling sickness, rheumes and
impostumes. Also it makes the wits dull, the body flow and unapt to honest
exercise. Semblably immoderate watch dries too much the body, and doth
debilitate the powers animal, lets digestion, and makes the body apt to
consumption. Wherefore in these two things, as well as all other, a diligent
temperance is to be used, the moderation is best coniected (for it is hard
perfectly to know it) by the sensible lightness of the body, specially of the
brain, the brows, and the eyes, the passage down of the meat from the
stomach, the will to make urine, and to go to the stool: contrariwise,
heaviness in the body eyes, and savour of the meat before eaten, signifies
that the sleep was not sufficient. They that are hole, must sleep first on
the right side, because the meat may approach to the liver, which is in the
stomach as fire under the pot, and by him is digested.

To them which have feeble digestion, it is good to sleep prostrate on their
bellies, or to have their bare hand on their stomachs. Lying upright on the
back it is to be utterly abhorred.

The commodity of exercise, and the time when it should be used. CAP. 31.
Every moving is not an exercise but only that which is vehement, the end
whereof is alteration of ye breath or wind of a man. Of exercise do proceed
two commodities, evacuation of excrements, and also good habit of the body:
for exercise being a vehement motion, thereof needs must ensue hardness of the
members, whereby labour shall the less grieve, and the body be the more
strong to labour. Also thereof comes augmentation of heat, whereby happens
the more attraction of things to be digested, also more quick alteration
better nourishing. Moreover, that al and singular parts of the body, be
therewith somewhat humected. Whereby it happens, that things hard be
mollified, moist things are extenuate, and the pores of the body are more
opened. And by the violence of the breath or wind, the pores are cleansed, and
the filth in ye body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the
preservation of health, that without it, no man may be long without sickness:
which is affirmed by Cornelius Celsus, saying, that sluggishness dulls the
body, labour doth strengthen it: the first brings the incommodities of age
shortly, the last makes a man long time lusty. Notwithstanding, in exercise
ought to be four things diligently considered, that is to say: the time, the
things preceding, the quality, and quantity of exercise. First, as concerning
the time convenient for exercise, that it be, not when there is in the stomach
or bowels great quantity of meat, not sufficiently digested, or of humours,
crude, or raw, least thereby peril might ensue by conveyance of them into al
the members, before those meates or humours be concoct or boiled sufficiently.
Galen saith, that the time most convenient for exercise is, when both the first
second digestion is complete, as well in the stomach, as in the veins, that
the time approaches to eat eftsoones. For if ye do exercise sooner or later,
ye shall either fill the body with crude humours, or else augment yellow choler.
The knowledge of this time is perceived by the colour of the urine: for that
which resembles unto clear water, betokens that the juice which comes
from the stomach, is crude in the veins: that which is well coloured, not too
high or base, betokens that the second digestion is now perfect: where the
colour is very high or red, it signifies that the concoction is more then
sufficient. Wherefore when the urine appears in a temperate colour, not red
nor pale, but as it were gilt, then should exercise have his beginning.

Of Fricasies or rubbings preceding exercise. CAP. 32.
AS touching things preceding exercise, as much as it is to be feared, least by
vehement exercise any of the excrements of the belly or bladder, should hastily
be received into the habit of the body, by the violence of heat kindled by
exercise, also least some thing which is hole, be by heaviness of excrements or
violent motion, broken or pulled out of his place, or that the excrements by
violence of the breath, should stop the pores or conduits of the body, it
shall be necessary little and little, by chasing the body, first to mollify
the parts consolidate, and to extenuate or make thin humours, and to loose and
open the pores, and then shall ensue to him that exercises no peril of
obstruction or rupture. And to bring that to pass, it shall be expedient,
after that the body is cleansed, to rub the body with a course linen cloth,
first softly and easily, and after to increase more and more to a hard swift
rubbing, until the flesh do swell, and be somewhat ruddy, and that not only
down right, but also overthwart and round. Some do use fricasies in this
form, in the morning after that they have bin at the stool, with their shirt
sleeves or bare hand, if their flesh be tender, they deo first softly, and
afterward faster rub their breast sides downward, overthwart, not touching
their stomach or belly, and after cause their servant semblably to rub
overthwart their shoulders and back, and beginning at their neck bone, and
not touching the rains of their back, except they do feel there much cold
and wind, and afterward their legs from the knees to the ankle: last, their
arms from the elbow, to the hand-wrest. And in this form of fricasie, I my
self have found an excellent commodity. Old men, or they which be very dry
in their bodies, if they put to some sweet oils, as Yrinum, Nardinum,
Chamelinum, or other like mixed with a little sweet oil of Roses, I suppose
they do well. I will not here speak of ointments, used in old time among the
Romanes and Greekes, in fricasies or rubbings. For I suppose, that they were
never here used, and in the said places, they be also left, unless it be in
palsies, or apoplexies, or against the rigour which happens in fevers only.
I will remember the saying of Hippocrates: Fricasie hath power to loose, to
bind, to increase flesh, and to minish it. For hard fricasies do bind or
consolidate: soft rubbing doth loose or mollify, much do minish flesh, mean
rubbing doth augment or increase it. He that will know more abundantly hereof,
let him read the book of Galen, of the preservation of health, called in
latin, Detuenda sanitate, translated most truly and eloquently out of Greek
into Latin, by Doctor Linac^e, late Physician of most worthy memory, to our
sovereign Lord King Henry the eight. The same matter is written more briefly
of Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius, and some other late writers, but unto
Galen not to be compared.

The diversities of exercises. CAP. 33.
THe quality of exercise, is the diversity thereof, for as much as therein be
many differences in moving, and also some exercise moves more one part of ye
body, some an other. In difference of moving some is slow, or soft, some is
swift or fast, some is strong or violent, some be mixed with strength or
swiftness. Strong or violent exercises be these, delving, specially in tough
clay, and heavy, bearing or sustaining of heavy burdens, climbing or walking
against a steep upright hill, holding a rope, and climbing up thereby, hanging
by the hands on any thing above a mans reach, that his feet touch not the
ground, standing and holding up, spreading the arms, with the hands fast
closed, and abiding so a long time. Also to hold the arms steadfast, causing
an other man to assay to pull them out, and notwithstanding he keeps his
arm steadfast, enforcing thereunto the sine was and muscules. Wrestling also
with the arms and legs: if the persons be equal in strength, it doth
exercise the one and the other: if the one be stronger, then is it to the
weaker a more violent exercise. All these kinds of exercises, and other like
them, do augment strength, therefore they serve only for young men, which be
inclined, or be apt to the wars. Swift exercise without violence is running,
playing with weapons, tenise, or throwing of the ball, trotting a space of
ground forward, backward, going on the toes, and holding up the hands. Also
stirring up and down his arms, without plummets. Uehement exercise is
compound of violent exercise, and swift, when they are joined together at one
time, as dancing of Galiardes, throwing of the ball, and running after it.
Football play may be in the number thereof, throwing of the long Dart, and
continuing it many times, running in harness, and other like: the moderate
exercise is long walking, or going a journey.

The parts of the body have sundry exercises appropried unto them, as running
and going is most proper for the legs: moving of the arms up and down, of
stretching them out, and playing with weapons, serves most for the arms and
shoulders, stooping and rising oftentimes, as lifting great weights, taking up
plummets, or other like poyses on the ends of the staves, and in likewise
lifting up in every hand a spear or morespike by the ends, specially crossing
the hands, and to lay them down again in their places: these do exercise the
back and loins. Of the bulk and lungs, the proper exercise is moving of the
breath in singing and crying. The entrails which be underneath the middreffe,
be exercised by blowing either by constraint, or playing on shaulmes or
sackbots, or other like instruments which do require much wind.

The muscules are best exercised with holding ye breath in a long time, so that
he which doth exercise, hath well digested his meat, and is not troubled with
much wind in his body. Finally, loud reading, counterfeit battle, Cel. 2.
tenise, or throwing the ball, running, walking, and to shooting, which in mine
opinion exceed all the other, do exercise the body commodiously. Always
remember, that the end of violent exercise is, difficulty in fetching of
breath. Of moderate exercise, alteration of breath only, or the beginning of
sweat.

Moreover in Winter, running and wrestling is convenient. In Summer, wrestling
a little, but not running. In very cold weather, much walking, in hot weather,
rest is more expedient. They which seem to have moist bodies, and live in
idleness, they have need of violent exercise. They which are lean and
choleric must walk softly, and exercise themselves very temperatly. The
Plummets called of Galen Alteres, which are now much used with great men, being
of equal weight, and according to the strength of him that exercises, are
very good to be used fasting, a little before breakfast or dinner, holding in
every hand a plummet, and lifting them down with much violence, and so he may
make the exercise violent or moderate, after the poise of the plummets, heavier
or lighter, with much or little labouring with the.

Of gestation, that is to say, where one is carried, and is of an other thing
moved, and not of himself. CAP. 34.
THere is also an other kind of exercise, which is called Gestation, and is
mixed with moving and rest. For as much as the body sitting or lying seems to
rest, and notwithstanding it is moved by that which bears it, as lying in a
bed, hanging by cords or chains, or in a cradle, sitting in a chair which is
carried on men's shoulders with staves, as was the use of the ancient Romains, or
sitting in a boat or barge, which is rowed, riding on a horse which aumbleth
very easily, or goes a very soft pace. The bed, cradle, and chair carried,
serves for the that are in long and continual sickness, or be lately recovered
of a fever. Also them which have the frenzy or li^harge, or have a light
tertiane fever, or a quotidiane. This exercise sweetly asswageth troubles of
the mind, and provokes sleep, as it appears in children, which are rocked.
Also it is convenient for them, which have the palsy, the stone, or the gout.
Gestation in a chariot or wagon, hath in it a shaking of the body, but some
vehement, and some more sustained, the soft serves in diseases of the head, and
where any matter runs down into the stomach and entrails. But the
vehement shaking is to be used in the griefs of the breast and the stomach.

Also in swelling of the body and legs, in dropsies, palsies, migrimes, and
scoto^ies, which is an imagination of darkness: being returned at the end of
his journey, he must sit up, and be easily moved. I have known saith Aetius,
many persons in such wise cured, we out any other help. Navigation or rowing
nigh to the land in a calm water, is expedient for them that have dropsies,
lepries, palsies, called of the vulgar people takings fransies: to be carried on
a rough water it is a violent exercise, induces sundry affections of the mind,
sometime fear, sometime hope, now coward heart, now hardiness, one while
pleasure, an other while displeasure. These exercises, if they be well tepered,
they may put out of ye the body al long during sicknesses: for yt which is mixed
with rest moving, if any thing else may, it most excellently causes the body
to be well nourished. Celsus doth prohibit Gestation, Celsus. 2.
where the body feels pain, in the beginning of fevers, but when they cease,
he allows it. Riding moderately and without grief, doth corroborate the
spirit body above other exercises, specially the stomach, it cleanses the
senses and makes them more quick. Albeit to the breast it is very noyful, it
ought to be remembered, that as well this, as all other kinds of exercise, would
be used in a whole country, and where the air is pure and uncorrupted.
Foreseen that he that will exercise, do go first to the stool, for the causes
rehearsed in the last chapter.

Of Vociferation. CAP. 15.
THe chief exercise of the breast and instruments of the voice, is
vociferation, which is singing, reading or crying, whereof is the property
that it purges natural heate, and makes it also subtle and stable, and
makes the members of the body substantial and strong, resisting diseases.
This exercise would be used of persons short winded, and them which cannot
fetch their breath, but holding their neck straight upright. Also of them
whose flesh is consumed, specially about the breast and shoulders. Also which
have had aposthumes broken in their breasts. Moreover of them that are hoarse
by the much moisture, and to them which have quartayn fevers, it is convenient:
It loses the humour that sticks in the breast, and dries up the moistnes of
the stomach, which properly the course of the quartaine is wont to bring with
them, it also profits them which have feeble stomachs, or do vomit
continually, or do break up sowrenes out of the stomach. It is good also for
griefs of the head. He that intends to attempt this exercise, after that he
hath been at the stool, and softly rubbed the lower parts, and washed his
hands, let him speak with as base a voice as he can, and walking, begin to
sing louder and louder, but still in a base voice, and to take no heed of
sweet tunes or harmony. For that nothing doth profit unto health of body,
but to enforce himself to sing great, for thereby much air drawn in by
fetching of breath, thrusts forth the breast and stomach, and opens and
enlarges the pores. By high crying and load reading, are expelled superfluous
humours. Therefore men and women having their bodies feeble, their flesh loose,
and not firm, must read oftentimes load, and in a base voice, extending out
the windpipe, and other passages of the breath. But notwithstanding this
exercise is not used always and of all persons. For they in whom is abundant
of humours corrupted, or be much diseased with cruditie in the stomach and
veins, those do I counsel to abstain from the exercise of the voice, least
much corrupted juice or vapours, may thereby be into all the body distributed.

And here I conclude to speak of exercises, which of them that desire to
remain long in health is most diligently, and as I might say, most
scrupulouslie to be observed.

The third Book of the Castle of Health.
Of Repletion. CAP. 1.
REpletion is a superfluous abundance of humours in the body: and that is in
two manner of wise, that is to say, in quantity and in quality: in quantity,
as where all the four humours are more in abundance, then be equal in
proportion to the body that contains them, or where one humour much exceeds
the remnant in quantity. In quality, as where the blood or other humour, is
hotter or colder, thicker or thinner, then is convenient unto the body.

First, where all the humours being superfluously increased, fills and
extends the receptories of the body, as the stomach, the veins, and the
bowels, and is most properly called fulness, in Greek Plethora, in Latin
Plenitudo.

The other is, where the body is infarsed either with choler, yellow or black,
or with fleume, or with watery humours, and is properly called in Greek
Cacothimia, in Latin Vitiosus succus, in English it may be called corrupt
juice. I will not here write, the subtle abundant definitions and descriptions
of Galen in his books de plenitudine, and in his commentaries upon the
aqhorismes of Hippocrates. For it shall here suffice, to show the operations
of repletion, good or ill, remitting them which be curious, and desire a more
ample declaration to the most excellent works of Galen, where he may be
satisfied, if he be not determined to repugn against reason. Hippocrates
saith, where meat is received much above nature, that makes sickness, Galen
declaring that place Lib. 2. Aph. apho. 12. Vbi cibus praeter natutam plus
ingestus est, hic morbum facit.
saith: more meat then accords with natures measure, is named repletion. And
afterward he expounded that word above nature, to signify too much and
superfluosly, as who saith, where the meat is superfluously taken, it makes
sickness. For meat but a little exceeding temperance, Galen. in comment. loco
praedicto.
may not forth with make sickness, but may yet keep the body within the
latitude or bounds of health, for the meat that shall make sickness, must not a
little exceed the exquisite measure. The incommodity which happens thereby
is, that moistnes is too much extended, and natural heate is debilitate. Also
natural heate resolves some what of the superfluous meat and drink. And of
that which is resolved of meat vndigested, proceeds fumosity gross and
vndigested, which ascending up into the head, and touching the rym wherein the
brain is wrapped, causes headache, trumbling of the members, duskishnesse of
the sight, and many other sicknesses, also by the sharpnes thereof, it pricheth
and annoys the sinews, which make sensibilitie, the roots of whom are in
the brain, and from thence passes through al the body. Finally the said
^mosity engendered of repletion, piercing the innermost part of the said
sinews called sensible, grievously annoys the power animal, there
consisting, by the occasion whereof, understanding and reason, as to the use of
them are let and troubled.

And also the tongue which is reasons expositour, is depriued of his office, as
it appears in them which are drunk, and them which have grievous pains in
their head, proceeding of repletions. Signs of repletion be these, loss of
appetite, delight in nothing, slothfulnes, dullness of the wit and senses, more
sleep then was accustomed to be, cramps in the body, sterting or salcion of
the Oribasius euoriston. lib. 1.
members; fulness of the veins, and thickness of the pulses, horror or
shroueling of the body mixte with heate. The remedies are abstinence and all
evacuation, whereof I will make mention in the next Chapter.

Of Evacuation. CAP. 2.
THe meates and drinks received into the body: if the stomach and liver do
their natural office, be altered by concoction and digestion in such wise,
that the best part thereof, goes into the nourishmet of the body. The worst
being separate by the members official, from the residue, are made excrementes
in sundry forms and substances, which are like in quality to the natural
humour, which then reigns most in the body. These excrements be none other,
but matter superfluous, and unsavoury, which by natural powers may not be
converted into flesh, but remaining in the body, corrupt the members, and
therefore nature abhorring them, desires to have them expelled. These
excrements be three in number, ordure, urine, humour superfluous. Moreover
there be two sorts of ordure, that is to say, one digested, which Ordure.
passes by siege, the other vndigested, which is expelled Digested.
by vomit. Where I say digested, I mean that it is passed the stomach, and
turned unto an other figure. Likewise I call that vndigested, which still
remains in the figure of meat.

Uryne is the watery substance of the blood, like as Urine.
why is of milk, which out of the meat that is altered, and concoct or
boiled in the stomach, is strained in the veins called Misaraice, which
proceeds from the hollow part of the liver, and sent by the raynes into the
bladder, passes by the instrument, the which is ordained as well to that
purpose, as for generation.

Humour superfluous is in three sorts, ether mixed with any of the four
humours, called natural, or else it Humour superfluous.
is gathered into the brain, or it is between the skins and the flesh, or
lies among the sinews, Muscules or joints. Of humours some are more gross,
some are cold, subtle and hot, and are called vapours. Now for to expel the
said excrements, are 9. sundry kinds of evacuation, that is to say, abstinence,
vomit, purgatio by siege, letting of blood, scarifying called cupping,
sweating, provocation of urine, spitting, bleeding at the nose, or by
hemerodes. And in women their natural purgations. Of these euacuatios I will
briefly declare, with the commodities, which by the discreet use of them do
happen unto ye body.

Of abstinence. CAP. 3.
ABstinence is a forbearing to receive any meat or Cor. Cel. lib. 2. Hipp. 2.
aphor. lib. 7.
drink. For if it be but in part, it is rather then called temperance then
abstinence. It ought to be used only after repletion, as the proper remedy
therefore. And the if it be moderate, it consumes superfluities, in consuming
them, it clarifies the humours, makes the body Considerations in abstinence.
fair coloured, and not only keeps out sickness, but also where sickness is
entered, nothing more helps it if it be used in season. To them which have
very moist bodies hunger is right expedient, for it makes them more dry,
notwithstanding there ought to be considerations in the meat before eaten, in
the age of the person, in the time of the year, and in custom. First in the
meat before eaten, if it be much in excess, or very gross, or not much
exceeding, or light of digestion, and according thereunto would abstinence more
or less be proportioned. Concerning Aph. lib. 1. Gal. in comment.
age, Hippocrates saith, old men may sustain fasting easily: next unto them,
men of middle age, young men may worse bear it, children worst of all,
specially they that be lusty, notwithstanding, here Galen corrects
Hippocrates saying: that he should have excepted men very old, who, as
experience declares, must eat often and little. As touching time, it must be
remembered that in winter and spring time, the stomachs be naturally very hot,
and sleep is long, and therefore in that time, meates would be more
abundant, and although much be eaten, it will be sooner digested. Wherefore
abstinence would not be the so much as in summer, albeit, to abstein much in
Summer, except it be after repletion, Damascene Damascenus apho.
saith, it dries the body, it makes the colour salow, it engenders
melancholy, and hurts the sight. Moreover custom may not be forgot, for
they which be used from childhood, to eat sundry meals in the day, would
rather be reduced to fewer meals, and little meat, then to be compelled to
abstain utterly, to the intent that nature which is made by custom, be not
rebuked, and the power digestiue thereby debilitate. And note well, that by too
much abstinence, the moisture of the body is withdraw: and consequently the
body dries, and wareth lean, natural heate, by withdrawing of moisture is
too much incended, and not finding humour to work in, turns his violence to
ye radical or substantial moisture of the body, and exhausting that humour,
brings the body into a consumption. Wherefore Hippocra. saith, that too Apho
lib. 2.
scarce and exquisite an order in meat and drink, is for the more part more
dagerous then that which is more aboudant. Contrariwise moderation in
abstinence according to the said consideration is to health a sure bulwark.

Of Vomit. CAP. 4.
THe meat or drink superfluous, or corrupted, in the stomach, is best
expelled by vomit, if it be not very grievous to him which is diseased. Also
the moderate use Aetius lib. 3.
of it purges fleume, lights the head, causes that the excess of meates or
drinks, shall not annoy or bring sickness. Moreover it amends the affects
of the raynes, bladder and the fundament. It also helps against lepries,
cankers, goutes, dropsies, and also diverse sicknesses proceeding of the
stomach. For if any grief happens of the head, vomit is then vncommodious.
It is better in winter how in Summer. Also good for them which are replete or
very choleric, if they have not well digested, but it is ill for them that be
lea^e, or have weak stomachs. And therefore where one feels bitter vapors
rising (...), with grief and weightines in the over parts of his body, let
him run forth to this remedy. It is also good for him that is heart burned,
and hath much spit^, or his stomach wambleth, and for him that removes into
sundry places. Yet I counsel, saith Celsus, him that will be in health, and
would Cor. Cd. lib. (...).
not be so soon aged, that he use not this daily. And I my self have known me
which daily using it, have brought thereby their stomachs in such custom,
that whatsoever they did eat, they could long retain it, whereby they shorten
their lives. Wherefore it would not be used, but only where great surfeit, or
abundance of fleume do require it. He that will vomit after meat, let him
drink sundry drinks mixed together, and first of all, warm water: or if that
be too easy, let him mix there with salt, or honey. If he will vomit fasting,
let him drink water and honey sodden together, or Hysope with it, or eat of a
Radish root, and drink warm water upon it. Also water wherein Radish is
boiled, and afterward provoke himself to it. They that will have more violent
purgations, I remit to Physicians learned. But yet I do eftsoones warn them,
that therein they be circumspect, and do not much use it. Moreover, in
vomits, ye matter brought forth, would be considered, according to the rules of
Hippocrates, in his second book of prognostications, that is Hippo. praesag.
2. cap. 7.
to say, if it be mixed with fleume and choler, it is most profitable, if it be
not in very great quantity, or thick, the less mixture it hath, the worse it
is. If it be green like to leek blades thin or black, it is to be judged
ill. If it have all colours, it is extreme perilous. If it be leadie coloured,
and savours horrible, it signifies a short abolition, or dissolution of
nature. For as Galen affirms there in his comment, such manner of vomit
declares Galen de loci^ affectis lib. 1.
corruption with extincting of nature. Also every putrified and stinking savour
in vomit is ill. These things be right necessary to be looked for where one
doth vomit without any difficulty: but to enforce one to vomit, which cannot,
is very odious and to be abhorred.

Of purgation by siege. CAP. 5.
IF the head be heavy, or the eyes dim, or if there be pain felt of the
colicke, or in the lower part of the belly, or in the hippes, or some choleric
matter or fleume in the stomach. Also if the breath be hardly fetched, if the
belly of himself sends forth nothing, or if being costive, one feels ill
savour or bitterness in his mouth, Cel. lib. 1. Actius lib. 3.
or that which he makes hath an horrible savour, or if abstinence do not at
the first put away the fever, or if the strength of the body may not sustain
letting of blood, or else the time therefore convenient is past, or if one have
drunk much before his sickness, or if he which oftentimes unconstrained hath
had great sieges, be suddenly stopped. In all these cases, and where it is
painful to vomit, and in gnawing or frettings of the stomach: finally, in all
repletions, where a man cannot or will not be let blood or vomit, it is
expedient to provoke siege by purgations, which are to be received by two
ways: upward at the fundament by suppositories or clisters: downward at the
mouth, by potions, electuaries, or pills. Suppositories are used where ye
patient is weak, and may not receive any other purgations. Sometime forasmuch
as the strait gut is stopped with excremets, which are dry and hard: sometime
where there needs none other purgation, specially in burning fevers, whereof
the matter ascends into the head, the clisters may do harm, and by the
benefit of suppositories, excrements are brought forth without any annoyance.
And oftentimes it brings forth that which clisters may not. Suppositories
are made sometime with honey only, sodden, rolled on a board, and made round,
smaller at one end then at the other, and of the length and greatness, according
to the quantity of the body that takes it. Sometime there is mixed with the
honey, salt dried, or salt and pepper, or the powder of such things as do either
purge the humour which offends, or dissolveth gross winds, or other matter:
they be sometime made with rosme, pitch, wax, or gummes: sometime of roots,
or the leaves of green Mercury, very small bruised. Also with figs or
raisons, the stones taken out, or of white soap made in the figure aforesaid,
and being made in the form aforesaid, they must be put in at the fundament
to the great end, and the patient must keep it there the space of half an
hour or more.

Clisters are made of liquor sometime simple, as water sodden, milk, oil, or
wine: sometime mixed, as water and oil together, or decoctions, as where herbs,
roots, fruits, feeds, or gumes, having property to make soft, dissolve,
draw forth, or expel matter that grieves, be boiled, the liquor thereof
sometime warm, sometime hot, is received at the fundament into ye body, by a
little pipe of gold or silver, ivory, or wood, therefore ordained and called a
clister pipe. This is necessary where the stomach is weak, and may not
sustain working of medicines received at the mouth: also in fevers, collickes,
and other diseases in the bowels, grief in the rains of the back, or huckle
bone, dentosities in the belly, inflammation or exulceration in the guts or
bladder. It is a convenient and sure medicine, and least hurt doth ensue of it.
The making and ordering thereof, I will omit to write in this place, partly
that I would not that Physicians should too much note in me presumption, partly
that another place may be more apt to that purpose.

The particular commodities of every purgation. CAP. 5.
IN potions, electuaries, and pills, ought to be much more observation, than
in clisters or suppositories, for as much as these do enter no further then
unto the gut where the ordure lies, and by that place only brings forth the
matter which causes disease. But the other entering in that way, that meates
and drinks do, comes into the stomach, and there is boiled, and sent into
the places of digestion, and afterward is mixed with the juice, whereof the
substance of the body is made, and expelling the adversary humours, somewhat
thereof doubtless remains in the body. Wherefore men have need to beware,
what medicines they receive, that in them be no venenositie, malice or
corruption, least for the expelling of a superfluous humour, which perchance
good diet or some broths made of good herbs, or the said euacuatio, with
suppositorie or ^ister, might bring forth at leisure, by desiring of too
hasty remedy, they receive in medicine, that which shall engender a venomous
humour, and vneuitable destruction into all the body. And therefore happy is
he which in sickness finds a discreet and well learned Phisitio, and so true
Apothecary, that hath always drugs uncorrupted, and whom the Physician may
surely trust to dispense his things truly.

But now to return to the said form of purgation, I will now set forth some
cousailes, concerning that matter which I have collected out of the chief
Authors of Physic. Bodies hot and moist, may easily sustain purgation by the
stool. They which be leanie or thin, having the members tender, may take
harm by purgations. To men that are choleric, them that eat little,
purgations are grievous. In young children and old men, it is dangerous to
loose much the belly. To them that are not wont to it, purgation is noyfull. He
that lives in a good order of diet, needs neither purgatio nor vomit. After
that the purgation hath wrought, thirstines, and sound sleep, be signs that
the body is sufficiently purged. By daily (...) of medicines, Nature is
corrupted. When ye will purge any thing, make first the matter flowing and
soluble. Medicine to purge, ought not to be mingled with meats, but to be taken
4 hours at the least before meals, or three hours after meals, except
certain easy pills made to cleanse and comfort the stomach, which would be
taken at the beginning of supper, or after supper, a little before that one
goes to bed, making a light supper or none. After purgation taken, the patient
should rest, and not walk until the medicine hath wrought, nor eat nor
drink in the mean space. These things have I remembered, because I have known
right good Physicians, to have forgotten to instruct thereof their patients.
Now will I set forth the table of such things which of their property do
digest, or purge superfluous humours particularly, which I have gathered out of
the books of Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius and Aetius, and
other late writers: notwithstanding, I have not written all, for as much as
there be diverse things, whereunto we have not yet found any names in English.

Digestiues of choler.
Endiue, Lettise, Cicorie, Scabiose, Maiden hair. Malowes, Mercury, The juice
of pomgranades. Purslane, Popie, Barberies, Roses. Violets the leaf and
flower, Sorrel, Liuerwort. Sorrel de boise, Why clarified. The four great
cold seeds, that is to say, of Gourds, Cucumbers, Melons, and Citruls.
Psilium, Vinegar, Saunders, Barley water, Prunes, Tamarinds.
Purgers of choler.
Wild hops, Wormwood, Centorie, Fumitorie. Why of butter, Uidlets, Mercury,
Prunes. Juice of Roses, Eupatorie. Tamarinds half an ounce in a decoction.
Manna 6. drammes at the least, and so to 25. in the broth of a hen or capon.
Reubarbarum by it self from two drams unto four, infused or steeped in
liquor, from four drams unto eight.
Digestiues of fleume.
Fenell, Persely the roots, Smallage, Capers, Laurel. Senuie, Puly, Marioram,
Peniroyall. Wild parsnep seed, Mint, Pimpernell, Horemint. Gladen, Agrimony,
Calamint, Nep, Betany, Sage. Radish, Mugwort, Juniper, Hysope, Pyony, Balm.
Honey, Ginger, Souilla, Alstolochia, Cinamom. Pepper, Cumine.
Purgers of fleume.
Centory, Nettle, Agrimony, Alder. Polipodium of the oak. Mirabolani kebuly,
infused from half an ounce to an ounce, and two drams, in substance from two
drams to half an ounce. Agaricus, from a dram to two drams, infused from two
drams to five. Yreos, Maydenhaire, Sticados.
Purgers of melancholy.
The brath of Coleworts light boiled. Balm mint, Sticados, Time. Scene boiled
in white wine, or in the broth of a hen. Lased sauery, Epithimus, Unwrought
silk, Organum. Calamint, Borage, Harts tongue, Quickbeme. Maidenhaire, With
wind, Pulial mountain. Honey, Sugar.
Melancholy for the thinnes and subtilnes of the humour, needs no digestiue.

They that will take sharpe purgations, or compound with diverse things, let
them take the counsel of an honest and perfect Physician, and not adventure
to mix things together, without knowing the temperance of them in degrees, and
that he can proportion them to the body that shall receive them in simples, as
they be written. And so he may use them without peril, against the humours
whereunto they serve.

Letting of blood. CAP. 6.
THe part of evacuation by letting of blood, is incision, or cutting of the
vein, whereby the blood, which is cause of sickness or grief to the hole body,
or any particular part thereof doth most aptly pass.

The commodities whereof being in a moderate quantity, and in a due time taken,
be these that follow: it clarifies the wit, and makes good memory, it
cleanses the bladder, it dries the brain, it warms the marow, being in ye
bones, it opens the hearing, it stops tears, or droppings of the even, it
takes away lothsomnes, and confirms the stomach, it nourishes that which
is proper to nature, and the contrary expels. It is thought that thereby
life is prolonged, and the matter making sickness, shortly consumed. Wherefore
letting of blood is not only expedient for them which are full of blood, or
have abundance of strength, but also for them, in whom without plenitude called
fulness, inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by some outward stroke,
the blood being gathered within by collection thereof, do feel grief or
disease.

Also where there is much pain felt, or debility of some member, whereof is
supposed to be engendered some grievous disease. Moreover, they which use
excess of meates and drinks, may be cured by letting of blood. But those
which be temperate, keeping good diet, be helped without letting of blood: as
by fricasies, using of bathes, exercise, walking, and riding moderately. Also
vnctions with oils and ointments called Diaphoretice, which by evaporation,
do shortly evacuate the fulness. Albeit, if the fulness be of melancholy blood,
then always needs must be letting of blood. Abundance of melancholy blood is
known by these signs. There is felt within ye entrails, or within ye bulk of
a man or woman, a waightines with tension or thrusting outward, and al that part
which is above the navel, is more heavy then it was wont to be: also much
urine and fatty, the residence or bottom thick, troublous, inflammation and
much pain. These must be shortly let blood, and the melancholy humour purged
by siege. They which have crude or raw humours, must be warily let blood,
before that sickness engender, but having the fever in no wise. Concerning
letting of blood, these things following would be had in continual
remembrance, and be before Aetius lib. 3.
thought on. In the abundance of the blood, the quality and quantity, the
greatness of the sickness, if it be present or looked for. Also the diet
preceding, the age and strength of the person, the natural form of his
body, the time of the year, the region or country, the present state of the
air, the disuse of accustomed exercise, the ceasing of euacuations used
before. In quality, consider of what humour the fulness proceeds. In
quantity, the abundance of that which is to be purged. In sickness, if it be
dagerous or tolerable: if ye sickness be present, it requires the more
diligence: if it be looked for, it may be the better proportioned. In diet,
the custom in eating drinking, must be specially noted. In young men women
letting of blood would be more liberal. In old men and young children, it would
be scarser: strong men must sustain bleeding, they which are feeble may not
endure it. Large bodies have greater vessels, then they which he little. Lean
men have more blood, corpulent men have more flesh. The time of the year must
be specially marked. For in the beginning of spring time it is best letting of
blood, as Oribasius saith, and so doth continue, after the opinio of Arnold,
unto ye 8. ^alends of June. Aetius affirms, that in winter, or in a cold
country, or where the person is of a very cold nature, ye veins should not be
opened. And Damascene saith: They which in youth have used to be much let
blood, after they be threescore years old, their nature wareth cold, if they
were of a cold complexion, but that is to be understood, where they that are
in health, are often let blood. For in the lapse from health and in diverse
diseases, wherein the blood is corrupted, or where it engenders impostumes, or
resorts to any place, where it ought not to be, or passes by any other
conduit then nature ordained, or where it is furious or inflamed, or by any
other means, breeds grievous diseases, in all these cases, it ought to be
practised, yea sometime in aged persons, women with child, and young infants.
For in extreme necessity, it were better experience some remedy, then to do
nothing. All other things concerning this matter, pertain to the part
curatiue, which treats of healing of sickness, whereof I will not now speak,
but remit the readers to the counsel of discreet Physicians.

Of scarifying called boxing or cupping. CAP. 7.
FOr as much as it is not convenient to be let blood oftentimes in the year,
because much of the vital spirit passes forth with the blood, which being
exhaust, the body waxes cold, and natural operations become the more feeble
I therefore do counsel (sayt^ Galen) that the base parts of the body, as
the legs be scarified, which is the most sure remedy, as well in conserving
health, as in repairing thereof being decayed. For it cures the eyne, being
annoyed with long distillations, it profits also the head and ouerpart of the
body against sundry diseases, in what member the blood is gathered, the body
being purged first by scarificatio, the grief may be cured.

Also Oribasius affirms the same, and also adds thereto that it helps
squinaces, or quinces in the throat, and dissolveth the costipations or
stoppinges made of all places, if the places be scarified, notwithstanding
application of boxes about the stomach in hot fevers, where reason is
troubled, are to be eschewed for fear of suffocation. Likewise put to the
head vndiscretly, it hurts both the head and the eyes. The late Authors do
affirm, that scarifying is in the steed of letting blood, wherefore age,
debility, or time of the year, or other like consideration, a man may not
sustain blood letting, and it brings forth the thin blood, which is next
to the skin.

Of blood suckers or leaches. CAP. 8.
THere is also an other form of evacuation, by worms found in waters, called
blood suckers or leaches, which being put into the body or member, do draw
out blood.

And their drawing is more convenient for fullness of blood then scarifying is,
for as much as they fetch blood more deeper, and is more of the substance of
blood, yet the opinion of some men is, that they do draw no blood but that
which is corrupted, and not proportionable unto our body. And therefore in
griefs which happen between the skin and the flesh of blood corrupted,
these are more convenient then scarifying. But therefore that they be put unto
any part of the body, they must be first kept all one day before, giving unto
them a little blood in fresh flesh. And then put them in clean water somewhat
warm, and with a spung wipe away the slime which is about them, and then lay
a little blood on the place grieved, and put them then to it, and lay on them a
spung, that when they be full, they may fall away, or if ye will sooner have
them off, put a horse hair between their mouths and the place, and draw them
away, or put to their mouths salt, or ashs, or vinegar, and forthwith they
shall fall, and then wash the place with a spug, and if there do issue much
blood, lay on the place the poulder of a spung, and pitch burned, or linen
cloth burned, or gaules burned, or the herb called Bursa pastoris bruised.
And this suffices concerning blood suckers.

Of Hemeroydes or piles. CAP. 9.
HEmeroides be veins in the fundament of whom do happen sundry passions,
sometime swelling without bleeding, sometime superfluous blood by the puissance
of nature is by them expelled, and then be they very convenient, for by the a
man shall escape many great sicknesses, which be engendered of corrupted blood,
or of melancholy. Semblably, if they be hastily stopped from the course
which they have been used to, thereby do increase the said sicknesses, which
by them were expelled, as dropsies, consumptions, madness, frensies, and
diverse diseases of the head, and other sicknesses: paleness of the visage,
grief in the rains of the back, and thighs. And if they flow too much, there
ensues feeblenes, learing of the body, alteration of colour, great pains in
the lower parts of the body. And if the flux be vnmoderate, it engenders
mischievous diseases. Wherefore it would be diligently taken heed, that they
run in measure, or else to use some things moderately, which may restrain
them. Concerning other euacuations, I do purposely omit to write of them in
this place, for as much as in this realm it hath bin accounted not honest, to
declare them in the vnlgar tongue, but only secretly.

Of effects of the mind. CAP. 10.
THe last of things called not natural, is not the least part to be
considered, the which is of affects and passions of the mind. For if they be
immoderate, they do not only annoy the body and short the life, but also they
do appayre, and sometime loose utterly a mans estimation. And that much more
is, they bring a man fro the use of reason, and sometime in the displeasure of
Almighty God. Wherefore they do not only require the help of Physic
corporal, but also the connsaile of a man wise and well learned in moral
Philosophie.

Wherefore after I have recited what they be, I will briefly declare such
counsels as I have gathered. And as concerning remedy of physic, saving a
few simples, which do comfort the heart and spirits, the residue I will remit
to the counsel of Physicians, like as I have done in evacuation. Affects of
the mind whereby the body is annoyed, do bring in sickness be these, Ire or
wrath, heaviness or sorrow, gladiles or rejoicing.

Of Ire. CAP. 11.
IRe is kindled in the heart, inordinately chasing the spirits there, and then
is sent forth unto the members, and doth superfluously heate them, and
disturbs reason where the bodies be hot before, where natural heate is
feeble, the heate may not be dispersed unto the extreme parts, and then doth
the extreme members, that is to say, which is far from the heart, remain
cold and trembling. Of this affect on comes sometime fevers, sometime
apoplexis, or privation of senses, trembling palseis, madness, frensies,
deformity of visage: and that worse is, outrageous swearing, blasphemy,
desire of vengeance, loss of charity, amity, credence, also forgetfulness of
benefit proceeding, and of obedience, duty and reverence. These also do
succeed, contention, chargeable suite, vnquietnes of mind, lack of appetite,
lack of sleep, feeble digestion, scorire, disdain, and hatred of other, with
peril of losing of all good reputation. These incommodities of Ire, perfectly
had in remembrance, and at the first motion thereof on them thought on, may
happen to bring in his fellows, and thereby the flame may be quenched, or let
him that is angry, even at the first, consider one of these things, that like
as he is a man, so is also the other, with whom he is angry, and therefore it
is as lawful for the other to be angry, as unto him, and if he so be, then
shall the anger be to him displeasant, and stir him more to be angry.
Wherefore it appears that ire is to him loathsome. If the other be patient,
then let him abhor that thing in himself, the lack whereof in the other
contents him, and asswageth his malice. Moreover let him before that occasion
of ire doth happen, accustom himself to behold and mark well them that
beeangrie, with the success of that anger, and ruminate it in his mind a good
space after. And in that time, let him remember, howe Christ, the son of God,
and God, who (as he himself said) might have had of God his father, if he
would have asked the, legios of Angels, to have defended him, yea with less
then a wink, might have slain all his adversaries, yet he notwithstanding
rebuked, scorned, falsely accused, plucked hither, thither, stripped, bounden
with halters, whipped, spit on, buffeted, crowned with sharpe thorne, laded
with a heavy piece of timber, his own proper tournement, halen and driven
forth like a calfe to the slaughter house, eftsoones beaten, and overthrown,
retched forth with ropes, arms and legs laid on the Cross, and thereunto with
long iron nails through the hands and feet nailed, with many stroks of
hamers, with many prickings, or ever the nails might pierce by his tether and
most blessed flesh and sinews, quite through the harde timber, up to the heads
of the nails: and all this being done for the offence of mankind, not his: yet
with the men which did it, his most unkind countrymen, his most unnatural
kinsmen, whom he first made of nothing preserved by miracles, delivered from
perils, and cured of diseases, in all his vexation and trouble, he was never
seen or perceived angry. If one will say, that anger is natural, let him also
consider that in Christ's manhood were all natural powers. If he will say, that
ire is taken of courage, and in Christ it lacked not, whom both angels and
deuilles trembled and feared. The premises often revolved, and born in ye
mind, I will not say, shall utterly extinct all motions of wrath which is not
possible, but it shall when it kindles lightly repress it, let that it shall
not grow into flame. And in speaking here of wrath, I do not mean that which
good men have against vices: or wise and discreet governors masters, against
the defaults or negligences of their subjects or servants, used in rebuking
them, or moderately punishing them. For that is not properly ire, but rather to
be called displeasure, and is that whereof God speaks by his Prophet Dauid,
saying, Be you angry and do not sin. And of that manner of anger hath bin
diverse holy men, prophets and other. And it appeared in Christ, when he drove
out them which made their market in the holy temple of God, where there ought
to be nothing but prayer. And in likewise when he rebuked the hypocrites. But
if none of these things may come so shortly to his remembrance, that is moved
with anger, at the least, let him think on the lesson that Appollodorus the
Philosopher, taught to the Emperor Octanian, that before he speak or do any
thing in anger, he do recite in order, all the letters of the A. B. C, and
remove somewhat out of the place that he is in, seek occasion to be otherwise
occupied. This shall for this time suffice, for the remedies of ire: And he
that will know more of this matter, let him read in my work called the
Governor, where I thereof do write more abundantly.

Of Dolor, or heaviness of the mind. CAP. 12.
THere is nothing more enemy to life, then sorrow, called also heaviness: for
it exhausts both natural heate and moisture of the body, and doth
extenuate, or make the body lean, dulls the wit, darkneth the spirits,
lets the use and judgment of reason, and oppresses memory. And Salomon
saith: that sorrow dries up the hones. And also like as the mouth in the
garment, and the worm Prou. 17. 25. Eccle. 25. 38.
in the tree, so doth heaviness annoy the heart of a man. Also in the book
called Ecclesiasticus. Sorrow hath killed many, in it self is found no
commodity. Also by heaviness death is hastened, it hides virtue or strength,
heaviness of hart bows down the neck. This is so puissat an enemy to nature,
and bodily health, that to resist the malice and violence thereof, are required
remedies, as well of the wholesome counsayles found in holy Scripture, and in the
books of moral doctrine, as also of certain herbs, fruits, and spices,
having the property to expel melancholic humours, and to comfort and keep
lively the spirits, which have their proper habitation in the hart of ma, and
moderate nourishing of the natural heate and humour called radical, which is
the base or foundation, whereupon the life of man stands, and that failing,
life falls into ruin, and the body is dissolved. Now first I will declare
some remedies against sorrowfulnes of heart, concerning necessary counsel.
Sometime this affect happens of ingratitude, either where for benefit, or
special love employed, one receives damage, or is abandoned in his
necessity, or is deceived of him whom he trusted, or finds him of whom he
hath great expectation, forgetful or negligent in his commodity, or perceives
the person whom of long time he hath loved, to be estraged from him, or to have
one of a later acquaintance in more estimation. This affection nips the
heart, yea of most wise men, for they love most heartily, not provoked by
carnal affection, but rather by good opinion, engendered by similitude of
honest studies, and virtuous manners, of long time mutually experienced. And it
is not only unto man grievous, but also unto God most displeasant and odious,
as it is abundantly declared in scripture. Wherefore the person which feels
himself touched with this affect, before that it grows into a passion,
waxes a sickness, let him call to remembrance these articles following, or at
the least wise, some of them. For every each of them may ease him, though
perchance they cannot forthwith perfectly cure him. Consider, that Coforts
against ingratitude. Appianus in varia historia.
the corruption of mans nature is not so much declared in any thing as in
ingratitude, whereby a man is made worse then diverse bruit beasts. The little
Ant or Emot helps up his fellow, whom he sees overthrown with burden or
by other other occasion.

Also when Elephants do pass over any great water: the greatest most puissant
of the divide themselves, and setting the weakest in the middle part, go
before trying the deepenes and perils, part come after, succouring the weakest
or least with their long noses, when they see them in danger. The same beasts
have been seen not only to bring men out of deserts, which have lost their
ways, but also renewing the displeasures done to them, which gave them meat,
as one that slew him, which had committed aduoutrie with his masters wife.

The terrible Lions and Panthers have bin seen in their manner to render
thanks to their benefactors, yea and to abject their own bodies and lives for
their defence. The same we may daily behold in our own dogs.

Than in whom thou find the detestable vice of ingratitude, reputing him
among the worst fortes of creatures, think not that thou hast lost a friend,
but think that thou art delivered from a monster of nature, that denoured thy
love, and that thou art now at liberty, and hast won experience to choose
thee a better. But if this may not suffice, Scene. de benefi. 7.
then eftsoones consider that if thou look well on thy self, perchance thou
may find the fault whereof thou complain, within thine own bosom. Cal to
thy remebrace if thou hast always rendered unto every man condign thanks or
benefit, of whom thou hast kindness received, or if thou hast always remembered,
every one of them, that have done to thee any commodity or pleasure. Thou
shalt well perceive, that what thing yt thou received in childhood, thou
forgattest or did little esteem, when thou came to the state of a man.
And what thou did remember in youth, in age thou did little think on,
thy nurses Pap, her rockings, watchings, thou hast not always remembered or
equally recompensed. The Schoolemasters study, his labour, his diligence in
like degree, thou hast not requited. What greater friend hast thou had of whom
thou could receive any greater benefits, the the nourishing preserving of
thy life in thy most feeblenes, thine eruditio, whereby thy nature was made more
excellent? Remembering this, leave to be angry or sorrowful, for so common a
vice: yet if it cease not to grieve thee, confer the ingratitude that doth vex
thee, with that in gratitude which was showed by the Israelites, whom God chose
for his own people, delivered from seruage, showed for them wonders, preserved
them forty years in ye desert, destroyed for them kings, gave to them the
country which flowed with milk and honey, defended them against all outward
hostility, sent unto them such abundance of riches, that silver was in
Jerusalem, as stones in the street, and his tabernacle, and afterward his most
holy temple among them, which he did daily visit, with his divine majesty,
made their kings to reign gloriously, and spake with their Prophets
familiarly, corrected their errors most gently, and yet for all this, they
embracing the Paynimes Idolatry, they left so gracious and loving a Lord, and
living God, to his great despite, gave divine honours to calves of brass, and
other monstrous Images, and at the last, put to most cruel death, the only
son of God, that had done so much for them. And if we Christian men do look
well on our selves, revolving the incomparable benefit, which we have received
by Christs passion, and consider the circumstance of his most excellent
patience, and most seruent love towards us, with our forgetfulness, and the
daily breach of our promise, which we made at our Baptism, coferring our
mutual unkindness thereunto, there shall appear no ingratitude, that should
offend us. Finally for a conclusion, behold well about thee, and thou shalt all
day find the children ingrate to their parents, wives to their husbands. And
wilt thou look that thy benefit or vain expectation, should make thee more
free from ingratitude of thy friend, whom chance hath sent thee, then nature may
the parents to their children, or the conjunction of bodies by lawful marriage,
take unkindness from the wives toward the husbands? The vice therefore of
ingratitude, being so common a chance, make no worldly friendship so precious,
that life or death therefore should be spent or consumed, I have been the
longer in this place, because I have had in this grief sufficient experience.

If death of children because of thy heaviness, call to thy Death of children.
remembrance some children, of whom there is no little number, whose lives,
either for vncorrigible vices, or unfortunate chances, have been more grievous
unto their parents, then the death of thy children ought to be unto thee:
considering that death is a discharger of all griefs and miseries, and to them
that dye well, the first entry into life everlasting.

The loss of goods or authority, do grieve none but fools, which do not
mark diligently, that like as neither Loss of goods.
the one nor the other doth always happen to them that are worthy, so we have
in daily experience, that they fall from him suddenly, who in increasing or
keeping them, seems most busy. Oftentimes the repulse from promotion is
cause of discomfort. But then consider whether in the opinion Lack of
promotion.
of good men, thou art deemed worthy to have such advancement, or in thine
own expectation and fantasy. If good men so judge thee, thank thou God of
that felicity, and laugh at the blindness of them, that so have refused thee.
If it proceed of thine own folly, abhor al arrogance, and enforce thy self
to be advanced in men's estimations, before thou can find thy self worthy
in thy proper opinion. All other chances of fortune esteem as nothing,
Channces of fortune.
and that long before they do happen. The oft recording of misery, prepares
the mind to feel less adversity. And the contempt of fortune is sure
quietness, must perfect felicity. This now shall suffice concerning remedies of
moral Philosophy. Now will I write somewhat touching counsel of Physic, as
in relieving the body, which either by the said occasions, or by the humour of
melancholy is brought out of temper.

The first counsel is, that during the time of that passion, eschew to be
angry, studious, or solitary, and rejoice thee with melody, or else be always
in such company, as best may content thee.

Avoid all things that be noyous in sight, smelling and hearing, and embrace
all things that is delectable.

Flee darkness, much watch, and business of mind, much companying with women,
the use of things very hot and dry, often purgations, immoderate exercise,
thirst, much abstinence, dry winds and cold.

Abstain from daily eating of much old beef, or old mutton, hard cheese,
hares flesh, bores flesh, venison, salt fish, coleworts, beans, and peason,
very course bread, great fishes of the sea, as thurlepole, or porpise, and
stourgion, and other of like natures, wines red thick, meates being very salt
or sour, old, burned, or fried, garlic, onions, and leekes.

Use meates which are temperatly hot, and therewith somewhat moist, boiled
rather then roasted, light of digestion, and engendering blood clear and fine.
As milk hot from the vdder, or at the least new milked, even these, sweet
Ruen cheese, Almonds, the yolks of rear eggs, little birds of the bushes,
chickens and hens, white wine or claret, clear and fragrant. Sweet savours in
winter hot, in summer cold, in the mean time temperate.

Comfortatiues of the heart hot.
Bourage the flower or leaf, Buglosse, Balm mint. Elicampane, Cloves,
Cardamomum, Rosemary. Lignum aloes, Musk, Ambergrise, Saffron. The bone of the
Hart of a red dear. Mints, The rind of Citron, Bean, Cubebes, Basil.
Comfortatiues of the heart cold.
Violets, Pearls, Coral, The Unicorns horne. Old apples which be good,
Roses, Sarnders. The Oliphants tooth, Water lillies, Coriander prepared.
Comfortatiues temperate.
Jacinct, Sapphire, Emeralds. Mirabolanes called Kebuli, Buglosse, Gold,
Silver.
Of Hope.
I Oy, or gladness of heart doth prolong the life, it fats the body that
is lean with troubles, biting the humours to an equal temperance, and drawing
natural heat outward. But if it be sudden fervent, it oftentimes slays, for
as much as it draws too suddenly and excessively natural heate outward. And
therefore diverse men and women have been seen to fall in a swoune, when they
have suddenly beheld the persons whom they fervently loved. A woman in Rome
hearing first that her son T. Liuius.
was slain in battle: after when he came to her, she seeing him alive,
embracing each other, she died in his arms. This well considered against such
inordinate gladness, the best preservative is to remember, that the extreme
parts of mundaine joy, is sorrow and heaviness: and that nothing of this world
may so much rejoice us, but occasion may cause it to be displeasant unto us.

The dominion of sundry complexions. CAP. 13.
IT seems to me not inconvenient, that I do declare as well the counsels
of ancient and approved authors, as also mine own opinion, gathered by
diligent marking in daily experience, concerning as well the necessary diet of
every complexion, age, and declination of health, as also the mean to resist
the discralies of the body, before sickness be therein cofirmed, leaving the
residue unto the substantial learning, and circumspect practise of good
Phi^itions, which shall the more easily cure their patients, if their patients
do not disdain to bear away and follow my counsel.

And first it ought to be considered, that none of the four complexions; have
solely such dominion in any ma or woman's body, that no part of any other
complexion is therewith mixed. For when we call a man sanguine, choleric,
fleumatike, or melancholic, we do not mean yt he hath blood only without
any of the other humours, or choler without blood, or fleume without blood or
melancholy or melancholy without blood or choler. And therefore the man which
is sanguine, the more that he draws unto age, whereby natural moisture
decays, the more is he choleric, by reason that heate surmounting moisture,
needs must remain heat and drith. Semblably ye choleric man, the more that
he waxes into age, the more natural heate in him is abated, and drith
surmounting natural moisture, he becomes melancholic: but some sanguine man
hath in the proportio of temperatures, a greater mixture with choler then
another hath. Likewise the choleric or fleumatike man, with the humour of
sanguine or melancholy. And therefore late practisers of Physic are wont to call
men, according to the mixture of their complexions, as sanguine choleric,
fleumatike sanguine, c. Moreover, beside the natural complexions which man
receives in his generation, the humours whereof the same complexions do
consist, being augmented superfluously in the body or members by any of the
said things, called not natural, every of them do semblably augment the
complexion which is proper unto him, and brings unequal temperature unto the
body. And for these causes the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman, feeling any
discrasie by choler happened to them, by the said things called not natural,
they shall use the diet described hereafter to him which is naturally
choleric. Semblably, the choleric or melancholic man or woman having any
discrasie by fleume, to use the diet of him which is naturally fleumatike,
always remembering, that sanguine and fleumatike me have more respect unto drith,
choleric and melancholy unto moisture, and that always as the accidental
complexion decaye^, to resort by little and little to the diet pertaining to
his natural complexion.

The times appropried to every natural humour. CAP. 14.
BUt first it must be considered, that where the four humours be always in
man, and in some man commonly one humour is more abundant then another
naturally, that is to say, from his generation: The said humours have also
peculiar times assigned to every one of them, wherein each of them is in his
most power and force, as after ensues, after the descriptio of Soranus. Fleume
hath most puissance in winter, from the 8. Jous of November, unto the 8. Idus
of February, whereby are engendered Catarres, or rheumes, the vuula, the cough,
and the stitch. This humour is part in the head, part in the stomach. It hath
dominion from the third hour of night, until the ninth hour of the same
night. Blood increases inspring time from the 8. Idus of February, unto the 8.
Idus of May, whereof are engendered fevers, and sweet humours, which do shortly
putrefy: the power of this humour is about the heart, and hath dominion fro
the ninth hour of night, until the third hour of the morning.

Red choler hath power in Summer, from the 8. Idus of May, until the 8. Idus
of August, whereby are engendered hot and sharpe fevers: this humour is
specially in the liver, and hath dominion from the third hour of the day,
until the ninth hour of the same day.

Yellow choler, whereof is engendered the fleume of the stomach, is nourished
in Autumn, which begins the 8. Idus of August, and during unto the 8. day
of November, makes shaking fevers and sharpe: the black choler then
increases, and then follows thickness of the blood in the veins. Black
choler or melancholy most rains in the spleen, and it rains from the ninth
hour of the day, until the third hour of night.

Peculiar remedies against the distemperance of every humour.
IF the distemperance be of blood, help it with things Soranus in art
medendi.
cold, sharpe and dry: for blood is moist, hot, and sweet. If it be of red
choler, give things cold, moist, and sweet: for red choler is bitter and
fiery. If it be of black choler, give things hot, moist, and sweet: for
black choler is sharp and cold. If the disease be of salt fleume, give things
sweet, hot, and dry: thus saith Soranus. Notwithstanding, where there is
abundance of cold fleume not mixed with choler, there things very sharp and hot
be most connenient, as tart vinegar with hot Roses, and seeds, or wines,
strong and rough honey being sodden in the one and the other: or where choler
is mixed with fleume, syrupe acetose made with vinegar and sugar boiled,
sometime with herbs, roots, or seeds, which may dissolve fleume, and digest
it.

Diet of them which are of sanguine complexion. CAP. 15.
FOrasmuch as in the sanguine men, blood most rains, which is soon
corrupted, it shall be necessary for them which are of that complexion, to be
circumspect in eating meat, that shortly will receive putrification, as the
more part of fruits, specially not being perfectly ripe: also meats that be of
ill juice, as flesh of beasts, too old or young, vdders of beasts, brains,
except of capons and chickens, marowe of the back bone, much use of Onyong,
Leekes, Garlic, much use of old figs, much use of raw herbs, and all
things wherein is excess of heate, cold, or moisture, meates that be stale,
fishes of fens, or muddy waters, and too much sleep, as experience shows.

Diet of choleric persons. CAP. 16.
TO them which be choleric, being in their natural temperature, and having
not from their youth used the contrary, gross meates moderately taken, be more
convenient then the meates that be fine, and better shall they digest a piece
of good beef, then a chickens leg. Choler of his property rather burning,
the well digesting meats of light substance: notwithstanding, some Gentlemen
which be nicely brought up in their infancy, may not so well sustain that
diet, as poor men, being the more part used to gross meates, wherefore their
diet must be in a temperance, as young beef, old veale, mutton, and venison
powdered, young geese, and such like, concerning their complexion with meates,
like thereunto in quality degree, according to the counsel of Hippocrates.
And as he perceives choler to abound, so to enterlace meates which be cold,
in a moderate quantity, and to allay their wine more or less with water,
eschewing hot spices, hot wines, and excessive labour, whereby the body may be
much chased. Also he may eat oftner in the day the any other: foreseen, that
there be such distance between his meals, as the meat before eaten be fully
digested, which in some person is more, in some less, according to the heate
strength of his stomach, noting always that the choleric person digests more
meat then his appetite desires: the melancholic person desires by false
appetite more then his stomach may digest. And to a choleric person it is
right dangerous, to use long abstinence: for choler finding nothing in the
stomach to conco^t, it fares then as where a little pottage or milk, being in
a vessel over a great fire, it is burned to the vessel, and unsavoury fumes
vapours do issue out thereof. Likewise in a choleric stomach by abstinence,
these inconveniences do happen, humours adust, consuming of natural moisture,
fumosities and stinking vapours, ascending up to the head, whereof is engendered
dusking of the eyes, head-aches, hot and thin rheumes after every little
surfeit, and many other incoveniences. Wherefore, beside ye opinion of ye best
learned me, mine own painful experience also moves me to exhort them, which
be of this complexion, to eschew much abstinence. And although they be
studious, and use little exercise, yet in the morning to eat somewhat in a
little quatitie, and not to study immediately, but first to sit a while, and
after to stand or walk softly, which using these two years, I, and also
other, that have long known me, have perceived in my body a great alteration,
that is to say, fro ill estate to better. Always remember, that if any other
humour do abound in ye choleric person, as fleume, or melacholy, then until
that humour be expelled, the diet must be correctiue of that humour, and
therefore more hot and fine, the the natural diet before rehearsed: but yet
there would be always respect had to the natural complexion, sometime offering
the person to eat or drink that, which nature working he fervently desires.

Diet of Fleumaticke persons. CAP. 17.
IT is to be remembered, that pure fleume is properly cold and moist, and
lacks taste. Salt fleume is mixte with choler, and therefore hath not in him
so much cold or humidity, as pure fleume hath, and therefore it requires a
temperance in things hot and dry, whereby fleume is digested or expulsed. To
fleumaticke persons all meates are noyful, which are very cold, viscous or
slimy fat, or soon putrified, eating much and often, specially meates
engendering fleume, which be remembered in the table preceding. All things be
good which are hot and dry, also meates and drinks which be sour: Onions
also and Garlic moderately used, be very commendable: in pure fleam not mixed
with choler, much using of salt, specially dried. Pepper gross beaten, and
eaten with meat, ought to be with all fleumaticke persons familiar, also
Ginger is right convenient, but not^o be so frequently used as pepper, for as
much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it passes through the body,
heating and comforting the stomach, not entering into the veins, or annoying
the liver, which virtue is not in Ginger, Ginger condite the which we do call
green Ginger, specially condite with sugar, if it may be gotten, and also
Mirabolanes called ^ebuly condite in Judea, be most excellent remedies against
fleam, also the herbs, which are remembered before in the tables of digestiues
of fleam, and the roots of Parsley, Fenell, Preos, Elicampane, and carrotes
be very commendable. Exercise twice in a day, the stomach being almost
empty, so that sweat begin to appear, is very expedient, clensing of the
body from all filthiness with rubbing and wiping oftentimes, with washing,
specially the head and parts there about, moderate sweating, in hot bathes or
stoues, be to this complexion necessary, specially when they have eaten and
drunken excessively. The head and feet to be kept from cold, and to dwell
high and far from moors, and marshes, is a rule right necessary: also to
abstain from eating herbs and roots not boiled, and generally from all
meates which will not be easily digested.

The division of melancholy, and the diet of persons melancholic. CAP. 18.
Melancholy is of two sorts, the one is called natural, which is only cold
and dry, the other is called adust or burned: natural melancholy is, as Galen
saith, the residence or dregs of the blood: and therefore is colder and
thicker then the blood. Melancholy adust is in four kinds, either it is of
natural melancholy adust, or of the more pure part of the blood adust, or of
choler adust, or of salt fleum adust. But of al other that melancholy is worst,
which is engendered of choler, finally all adust melancholy annoieth the wit and
judgment of man: For when that humour is het, it makes men mad, and when it is
extinct, it makes men fools, forgetful and dull. The natural melancholy kept
in his temperance, profits much to true judgement of ye wit, but yet if it be
too thick, it darkneth the spirits, makes one timorous, and the wit dull: if
it be mixed with fleam, it mortifies the blood with too much cold, wherefore
it may not be so little, that the blood and spirits in their feruentnesse, be
as it were unbridled, whereof do happen vnstablenesse of wit, and slipper
remembrance, nor yet so much that by the weight thereof (for it is heavy
approaching night to the earth) that we seem to be always in sleep, and need
a spur to prick us forward. Wherefore it is right expedient to keep that
humour as thin as nature will suffer it, and not to have too much of it. But
now to the diet pertaining to them, whom this humour annoys. The knowledge
that melancholy rains is oftentimes heaviness of mind, or fear without
cause, sleepiness in the members, many cramps without repletion or emptines,
sudden fury, sudden incontinency of the tongue, much solicitude of light
things, we plains of the visage, and fearful dreams of terrible visions,
dreaming of darkness, deep pits, death of friends, or acquaintance, and
of all things that is black. The meates convenient are they, which be
temperately in heate, but specially they that be moist meats soon digested, and
they rather boiled then roasted, temperatly mixed with spice, milk hot from the
vdder, or latemilked, is very convenient for that complexion, sweet almonds
blanched, almond milk, the yolke of reere eggs, and finally all things which
engender pure blood, and all that is written in the chapter of age, all these
be ill for them: wine thick or troublous, specially red wine, meates hard,
dry, very salt, or sour, burned meat, fried meat, much beef, bears flesh,
beans, rocket, colewortes, mustard, radish, garlic, except there be much wind
in the body, for then it is very wholesome, onyons, leekes, finally all things
which heats too much, kills too much, or dries too much, also wrath,
fear, compassion, sorrow, much study, or care, much idleness or rest, all thing
that is grievous to see, to smell or to hear, but most specially darkness.

Moreover much drying of the body, either with long watch, or with much care
and tossing of the mind, or with much lechery, or much eating and drinking of
things that be hot and dry, or immoderate evacuation, labour, abstinence,
thirst, going in the air vntemperately hot, cold, or dry, all these
things do annoy them that be grieved with any melancholy. It is to be
diligently considered, that where melancholy happens of choler adust, there
meates which be hot in working would be wisely tempered, and drinking of hot
wines would be eschewed, semblably cautel would be in savours,
notwithstanding moderate use of small wines clear and well verdured, is herein
very commendable, the humour thereby being clarified, and the spirits cleansed,
but the abuse or excess thereof, doth as much damage.

Also it is right expedient, to put into wine or ale, a gad of silver or gold,
glowing hot out of the fire, to temper hot meat with roses, violets, saunders,
rose water, borage, buglosse, balm, called in Latin Melissa, or the water of
all three, drunken with good wine white or claret, or made in a iulep with
sugar, is wonderful holsom, chewing of lyc^rise, or rayson or corance, is
right expedient, but most of al other things, mirth, good company, gladness,
moderate exercise, with moderate feeding. And thus I leave to speak of diets,
aptly belonging to the four complexions.

The fourth Book of the Castle of Health.
What cruditie is, and remedies therefore. CAP. 1.
I Will some what write of two discrasies of the body, which do happen by the
excess or lack of things called not natural, whereof I have spoken before:
the one is called cruditie, the other lassitude, which although they be words
made of Latin, having no apt english word therefore, yet by the definition
and more ample declaration of them, they shall be understood sufficiently, and
from henceforth used for english. But first it shall be necessary to consider,
that concoction is an alteratio in the stomach Concoction what it is.
of meates and drinks, according to their qualities, whereby they are made like
to the substance of the body. Crudity is a vicious concoction of things
received, they not being Cruditie what it is. The cause of cruditie.
wholly or perfectly altered: the cause thereof is sometime the distemperature
of the stomach, sometime inflannnations, sometime matter congealed, or
impostumes in the stomach, other while ingurgitation of meat and drink: or
for the vicious quality of the same meates or drinks, or the receiving of
them out of order, or lack of exercise, or of convenient evacuation. Galen
saith, that in cruditie or vicious concoction, it must be considered, as well if
the ^uke be utterly corrupted, and may not be sufficiently concoct, as also if
it be in the way of concoction: for if it be corrupted it must be expelled by
sweator urine, if it be half cococt, then must such things be ministered, as may
help to profit concoction, having regard to the quality and temperance of the
juice, that is to say, whether it be thick or thin, fleumaticke or choleric:
which shall be perceived by the diet preceding, and also by other things named
not natural, for fleumaticke meates eaten in great quantity or often, makes
fleumaticke juice.

Likewise doth lack of convenient exercise, too much rest or idleness, as
choleric meats, and dehement labours, do make choleric juice in summer, and
melancholic juice in Autumn, specially where labours be continual or long
during. Also where labour is with much sweat, there is the urine more gross:
where it is without sweat, there it is thinner. Moreover the colour and
substance of the urine declares the temperance of the juice, which shall be
here after declared in the table vrines.

Semblably the colour of the body declares the juice that is in it, for being
whiter then it was wont to be, it signifies abundance of fleume: being more
pale or yelow, it betokens excess of choler: if it be blacker, it signifies
melancholy, if the ill juice be much in quantity, and the blood little, the
ill juice would be digested, and expelled with such things as do serve for
that temperature, but if the blood be much, and the ill juice little in
quantity, there would the vain be opened, and after sufficient bleeding a
convenient purgation given, having regard as well of the quantity of the
juice, as of the kind thereof: in case that either for age or for timorousnes,
a man will not be let blood, then must he be purged by siege in more
abundance. But if he in whom is little good blood and much ill juice, and
feels a lattitude or weariness in all his body, he should neither he let
blood, nor receive purgation, nor yet labour or walk much: but abide in much
quiet, and assay to sleep much, and receive such meats, drinks and medicines,
which do extenuate or make thin, cut, digest gross humours, without vehement
heate, whereof it is written in the table of digestiues: in the number of whom
is oximel, being well made, or Acetosus simplex, where the juice is much
choleric or melancholic. Semblably, capers with oil and vinegar be praised
of Galen. When there appears in the urine a residence light and white, then
wine white or claret moderately taken, helps to concoction, makes a good
juice, and provokes urine, then increase frications and exercise by little and
little, then let him return to his natural diet. In whom is abundance of raw
juice, outwardly feels a lassitude, to them Galen counsayleth, the second or
third day to give meat, wherein Jsope is boiled and afterward to vomit.

The mean to escape cruditie, is to be diligent in observation of the counsels
before written concerning ye things called not natural, not much using meates
that be very hard to concoct, also fat meat, and meates long kept, also
corrupted, strinking, sweet fruits, and banqueting dishes, hasty feeding
witho^ good chewing, also much or very oft drinking at meals, very much heate,
or very much cold, after meat.

Furthermore it must be considered, that all things which brings grief to
the body, is engendered either of too much abundance of juice, or of the
vicious quality thereof. He that is sick of abundance, the diet of him
wholly consists in reducing the juice to a coueniet quantity. He that is
grieved with the vicious quality of the iuices, his order rests in making
the iuices equal in temperature. Moreover, where that which passes out of the
body, is less the that which is received into the body: there happens
sickness which comes of abundance, in the which case it ought to be
diligently foreseen, that there be observed a convenient mean of meates and
drinks, in respect of that which is expelled out of the body, which may be
done, if the quantity of each of them be wisely considered. And where
abundance is, there the quantity, or quality, or both be tempered.

Always remember that of crude juice be diverse kinds, some be cold and
fleumaticke, some be hot and choleric, other be more thin and watery, some
of black choler, or melancholic. They which do abound in any of them, must
abstain from such meats drinks, which do engender such juice, as doth annoy
them: those meats and drinks be declared in the tables preceding. Aetius also
would that Aetius sermon. 9.
he should drink a draught of cold water, affirming that thereby the stomach
being corroborate, drives out of him down into the belly, that which cleaves
fast to it. I my self using to drink fasting, very small beer or ale, when I
have been in that case, have found ease by it. Paulus Aegineta wills that at
the beginning, the legs arms should be rubbed with a course linen cloth, the
legs downward to the feet, the arms to the tops of the fingers, and when
they be well chafed, then to rub the again with some oil, that doth open the
pores discuss the vapors as oil of Camomile, oil of a neat, other like, he
praises much mulse, or the water of honey, specially if some Isope be boiled in
it. Galen and all other do agree, that in this case pepper bruised eaten with
meat, is very expediet. And where there is much wind in the stomach, then to
eat all times of the day, of the medicine made of the three kinds of pepper,
time, annise seed, and honey clarified, which is called Diatrion piperion, or
that which is called Diaspoliticon, or Diapiganon, which is made of Cummine,
steeped one day and a night, or longer in tart vinegar, and after fried or
laid on a burning hot stone, and made in powder, also pepper and rue dried
somewhat, and made into powder al in equal portions, and mixed with clarified
honey, Galen adds thereto salt peter called in latin nitrum. The confection
made with the juice of quinces, and is called Diacidonion, is very excellent.
But it is to be diligently noted, that where cruditie is in a choleric
person, there would the said medicines be temperatly used, the said Diacidonio
to have little or no spices in it. And for my part, being of a choleric
humour mixed with fleume, many years continually in cruditie. I never found
any thing better then fine Rewbar be chewed with raisons of corents, which I took
by the counsel of the worthiefull and well learned Physician, master Doctor
Augustine, who in his manners declares the gentleness of his ancient blood,
which medicine I do not leave to use daily fasting when I feel some cruditie
to begin. Also syrope acetose, that is to say, sugar sodden in pure vinegar,
and a little water, until it be thick as a syrupe, is sometime convenient, and
that as well to choleric persons as unto fleumatick, if fleum be abundant,
then with roots and seeds of fenel parcely sodden with it. Also in that case
oximell, that is to say, honey and water sodden together with the said roots
and seeds, and a quantity of vinegar put thereto in the boiling is very
commendable. If the parient be very costive, then ye medicine of Galen called
Hierapicra, from half an ounce to an ouce taken in water of honey or ale, or
taken in pills, the weight of a great, and a half, or two groats, if the
stuff be good, will purge the body sufficiently, without making the body
weaker. Also that medicine by clensing the stomach and body, delivers a man
and woman from any perilous sicknesses. If the humours in the stomach be not
putrified, but that it is grieved with abundance of fault (...), I have found
that milk new milked, wherein is put a quantity of good honey or sugar, and
three leaves of good spear mintes, and a little boiled, so being drunk warm
fasting, the quantity of a pint, and resting on it without eating or drinking
any other thing the space of 3. hours after, have abundantly purged and
comforted the stomach, but where there is no fleum but only choler, it is not
so wholesome, but rather hurts, making fumosities in the head, whereof
comnieth headache.

Of distillations called commonly rheumes, and of some remedies against them
right necessary. CAP. 2.
FOr as much as at this present time in this Realm of Englande, there is not
any one more annoyance to the health of mans body, then distillations from the
head called rheumes, I will not let to write some what of them, whereby men may
take benefit if they will, although some Physicians more considering their
market, then their duty to God and their country, will be never so much
offended with mine honest enterprise.

Distillation is a dropping down of a liquid matter out of the head, and
falling either into the mouth, or into the nosethrils, or into the eyes, and
sometime into the cheeks and ears: that which falls into the mouth is
received of the throat, into that part which is the instrument of the voice,
which at the first makes hoarsenes, in process of time makes the voice
little, and vnneth to be heard. And if the rheum be sharpe, it raises the
inward skin of the throat, sometime in doth exulcerate the lungs. If it doth
fall into the stomach, the rheum being a cold, it alters the body into a
cold distemperance: if he be hot, it makes a hot distemperature, doth some
what exulcerate in process of time, and at the beginning abates appetite,
makes feeble concoction. The cold rheum makes concoction slow, and also
cruditie, and engenders four fumes in the mouth. If it be corrupted, it
turns also nourishment unto corruption, which makes upbraiding fumish or
sharpe, or of some ill quality, which cannot be expressed: if the matter do
descend lower, it torments the guts called ieiunium, and colon, touches
other vessels from whence proceeds digestion: in this discrasie two things
are to be provided for: first to let that the rheum do not distill into the
said places: or if it hath done, that it be shortly expelled from them. First,
to let that it shall not distill, it shall be necessary to eat some meat the
sooner in the morning, if there hath not preceded repletion. Where the
temperature of all the body is choleric, and the stomach is weak, the stomach
would be made strong with such things as of their property do comfort the
stomach: foreseen that they be moderately cold and moist. And that which is
already fallen into the stomach, must be expelled with vomit or siege,
provoked with wormwood, steeped all one day and a night in a little small
white wine, or small ale or stale, which have virtue only to wipe away the
filth from the stomach: but if it be sucked deep into the films of the
stomach, then is it better to take the medicine called Hierapicra, either in
powder with drink warmed, or else in pills, to the number of ^iue or more, in the
morning six hours before any other meat or drink taken, afterward to
annoynt the mouth of the stomach with oil of Masticke, or Nardinum temperatly
warm, always if a hot rheum do fall into a hot stomach, then meates and
drinks which be cold in virtue, would only be used, where the stomach is
distempered with heate, and the rheum distills into a cold head, there is
the discrasie hard to be cured. And they which be so affect or diseased, must
take such things as may dissolve the fleume, and cleanse the stomach without
heating thereof, of the which virtue we know Oximel to be of. If the stomach
and head be both distempered with cold, then must be used meates, drinks and
ointments, which only be hot, and utterly to forbear all that is cold. By
these distillations or rheumes, happens many other grienous diseases, besides
those whereof I have spoken, as in the head whirlings, called in Latin
Vertigines, sudden swoundings, falling sickness, poses, stinking of the nose,
called Polipus, sores in the mouth, toothach, pin and web in the eyes, dullness
in hearing, squinces, fretting of the bowels, with flixes, shortness of breath,
grief in the heart, palsies, ach in the muscules and joints: wherefore it is
not be neglected. And I do much marvel that our Physicians do not more
studiously provide therefore remedies. I my self was by the space of four
years continually in this discrasie, and was counselled by diverse Physicians
to keep my head warm, and to use Diatrion piperion, and such other hot
things, as I have rehearsed: at the last, feeling my self very feeble, and
lacking appetite and sleep, as I happened to read the book of Galen, De
temperamentis, which treats De inequali temperatura, and afterward the sixth
book, De tuenda sanitate, I perceived that I had been long in an error.
Wherefore first I did throw away my quilted cap, my other close bonets, and
only did lye in thin coyfe, which I have ever since used both winter and
summer, and ware a light bonet of velvet only, then made I Oximell after the
doctrine of Galen, saving that I boiled in vinegar roots of parsley and Fenell,
with Endiue, Cicorie, and Betany, and after that I had taken it 3. days
continually, every day 3. spoonefuls in the morning warm: then took I of the
same Oximell, wherein I had infused and steeped one dram of Agarike, half a
dram of fine Reubarbe, the space of three days and three nights, which I
received in the morning, eating no meat six hours after, and that but a
little broth of a boiled hen, whereof ensued eight stools abundant of choler
and fleume: soon after I slept soundly, and had good appetite to eat. After
supper I would either eat a few Coriander seeds prepared, or swallow down a
little fine Mastix, and forbear wine, and drank only ale, and that but
little, stale and also warmed. And sometime in the morning would take a perfume
of Storax calamita, and now and then I would put into my nostrils either a
leaf of green Laurel, or Betany, or water of Marier^ bruised, which caused
the humour to distill by my nosethrils. And if I lacked Storax, I took for a
perfume the rindes of old Rosemary, and burned them, and held my mouth over the
fume, closing mine eyes: afterward to comfort my stomach and make it strong,
sometime I would eat with my meat a little white pepper gross bruised,
sometime Galens electuary made of the juice of Quinces, called Diacidonion,
sometime marmalade of quinces, or a quince roasted. And by this diet, I thank
almighty God, unto who only be given all glory, I was reduced into a better
state in my stomach and head, then I was sixteen years before, as it may
appear unto the which have long known me. And this have I not written for
vain glory, or of presumption, but to the intent that they which have their
bodies in like tepexature as mine was, that is to say, being choleric of
complexio, and having rheumes falling out of a hot head, may if they list assay
mine experience, or in the steed of my said infusion, take Hierapicra, with ale
or water to purge them, whereof shall not ensue so much peril, as of corrupted
syrupes, and other confections called Magistrates, made with old rottendrugs,
though the Physicians be never so well learned. In bodies of other temperature,
I would not that mine experience should be practised but with discretion,
tempering the medicine, as ye qualities of the stomach and head do require,
remembering always that hot rheumes be thin subtle, cold rheumes be for the most
part thick. And that they which be thin, would be made thick, that they pierce
not so fast. And yt they which be thick, would be made thin, that they may the
sooner be purged. Finally, this dare I affirm, that the rheumes, which of late
time have been more frequent in this realm, then they were wont to be forty
years passed, have happened of none occasion more she of banquetings after
supper, and drinking much, specially wine a little after sleep. Another thing
is the keeping the head too hot or too log covered, whereby the brain, which
is naturally cold, is distempered with hot vapours ascending from the stomach,
those same vapours being let to evaporate, or pass forth out of the head, and
therefore be concreate or gathered into a humour superfluous, which stills
downestsoones out of the head into the places before rehearsed. Yet now a days
if a boy of 7. years of age, or a young man of 20. years, have not two caps
on his head, he his friends will think that he may not continue in health. And
if the inner cap be not of velvet, or (...), a feruing man fears to loose his
credence. A Parson, Ui^ar, or parish priest, by using their velvet caps
imbrodred with laces, do make some men think that they be ashamed of their
crowns, that late token of the order of Priesthood, the which notable abuse, I
much marvel that the Bishops will suffer, specially they which have had
leisure to read the works of S. Ciprian, S. Hierom, Chrisostomus, S. Ambrose,
and sundry decrees made by the old Fathers concerning the honest vesture of
priests, which although it seem a light matter to some men, yet it augmeteth
or minisheth not a little in priests the estimation of their conditions.
Salomon confirming the same, saying: The garment, the gate, and laughter of a
man declares what he is. But this matter will I leave to another place, where
I intend to speak more abundantly of it, if it be not the sooner amended. Now
to conclude, as long as the said occauons continue, so long men shall not be
without rheumes, although they were all perfect Physicians.

By what tokens one may know whether the stomach and head be hot or cold.
NOw to return to the remedies against the said annoyance, whereof happens
so many great sicknesses, I will be bold to write a little out of the works of
the most famous and expert Physicians. First, the cause of the rheum must be
digested, after expulsed, thirdly diverted, that is to say, turned from the
even or throat into the nose, from whence it may be more easily purged.
Fourthly, it may be stopped that it shall not distill. In hot distillations the
head is very hot, in feeling the rheum being in the mouth, he is thin and
warm, the tongue or cheeks within blistered, the face sometime redder then it
is accustomed to be, sometime a burning within the nose. To them which have this
hot rheum, may be given the seed of white Popie, Diacodion made of the heads
of white Popie rain water. Amylum with milk, if there be no fever, penides,
mallowes, orage, gourdes, and spinach, boiled and eaten with oil of Almonds,
syrupe of violets, nenuphar, or the wine of sweet pomegranates, the water of a
great Cucumber, boiled with a little sugar being drunk, doth mitigate choler,
stops the rheum, and easily loses the belly: the seeds of Millons brayed
in a mortar with water, strained with soft bread, having sugar put to it,
makes an excellent good meat against the hot rheumes: plasters made of barley
bruised, violets, popie and Camomill boiled in water, wherein spunges or linen
clothes be dipped, should be laid on the head, and the genitories or legs
therewith washed. If the sick man cannot sleep, then the said parts with the
belly and fundament shall be anointed with the oils of Violets and Nenuphar,
the savour of Camphar in Rosewater with violets, is good in that case. Galen
exhorts, and I have proved, that in a very hot rheum, which hath stilled
fast, the pouring of cold water upon ones head, had stinted the rheum. He that
is therein diseased, must eschew going in the sun, or to come nigh a great
fire, or to stand, or be log covered, or to wear much on his head, he must
rest much, and provoke himself to sleep a night, but not very long, and to
lye on the one side on a hard bed, having his head high: also rubbing of his
legs before meals, is very wholesome. Cold rheumes be perceived by coldness
of the humour and head, with paleness of the visage, all cold things increasing
ye rheum. These things are good against it, the detection of Cicer with honey
and raisins, filberd nuts tosted, and eaten after meals: nothing is more
wholesome then abstinence, specially in the evening: they which have it, must
beware of Northern winds, the Mooneshine by night, washing in cold water, and
to be long bareheaded. The seeds of Nigella a little tosted, and put into a
piece of thin Sarcenet, and smelled unto, stops the rheumes.

Neefing in the beginning of rheum, is dispraised of Galen, but after that the
matter is digested, it is very wholesome: that may be made with leaves of
Laurel, or Betonie put into the nosethrils, the juice of Coleworts, the roots
of red Beetes, water of Marioram. A pretty medicine for that purpose proved.
The juice of young Beetes and Marioram, of each one ounce, good white wine
eight ounces, Saffron the weight of two pence, that being het and taken in the
mouth, shall be drawn up with breath to the place, whereby the distillations
falls out of the nose into the mouth. And if the rheum do distill into ye
cheeks and teeth, I have proved, that the juice of ground Juy, and that herb
which we call Mouse-eare, taken within a quill into the nosethrils, oftentimes
purges exceedingly the rheumes, and takes away the ach of the teeth.

Gargarising, if it be not discreetly used, may do more harm then good,
bring down much abundance of matter vndigested: but taken in order with water,
honey and pepper, or with Hysope and figs boiled in white wine, and taken very
hot in a gargarise is right convenient.

For compassion which I have of them that be vexed with toothach caused of
rheumes, I will by the leave of Physicians, conclude this chapter with an
excellent medicine against the said passion, which is written of an honourable
Physician of late years, which medicine also makes the teeth fast which be
loose, and also stops the superfluous bleeding of the gummes, where with ye
breath is made unsavoury. Take the rindes of Caper roots, the roots of
brambles, which do bear black berries, the flowers of Pomegrants called
balaustia, of every of them the weight of two ducats, Pelitorie of Spame one
ducats, seed of white Henbane, the rinds of Mandrage, of every of them one
ducats and a half, Spourge of the garden one handful, Alome of the rock two
ducats: boyle al these in white wine or claret, which is very rough in taste,
and strain it therewith, and let the patient oftetimes wash his mouth. Albeit
I will counsel them which will take this medicine or any other, first to
purge the cause of the rheumes, as before is rehearsed, or in any other wise,
as they shall be counselled by well learned and discreet Physicians.

Of Lassitude. CAP. 3.
LAssitude is a disposition toward sickness, wherein a man feels a sorenes,
a swelling, or an inflammation. Sorenes happens of humours sharpe and
gnawing, as after great exercise and labours, which lassitude happens Actius
lib. 3.
to them, whose bodies are full of ill juice and excrements. Also after
cruditie in the which are not exercised, or do abide long in the heate of the
sun. It may also be in the body wherein is good juice, if he be fatigate
with immoderate exercise. In them which do feel this lassitude, Galen detuen.
sanit. lib. 3.
the skin appears thick and rough, and there is felt a grief sometime in
the skin only, sometime also in the flesh, as it were of a sore. The cure
thereof is by much and pleasant rubbing with sweet oils, which have not the
virtue to restrain or close, and that with many hands, afterward to exercise
moderately, and to be baned in water sweet and temperate in heate: also then
must be given meates of good juice, pottage but seldom, wine is not to be
forbidden: for unto wine vnneth any thing may be compared, that so well
digests crude humours: it also provokes sweat and urine, and makes one to
sleep soundly. But if this lassitude do abide the night and day following, or
waxes more and more, then if the patient be of good strength and young, and
hath abundance of blood, let him be let blood, or provoke the hemerhoydes or
piles to bleed if they do appear. But if it proceed of the malice of any
humour without abundance of blood, then resort to purgations apt for the humour
that grieves. The tokens whereof shall appear as well by the colour of the
skin diet preceding, as by urine, ordure, sweat, thirst, appetite, as it is
rehearsed before in the complexios. If the ill blood be little in quantity,
and the crude humours abundant, the shall he not be let blood, nor vehemently
purged, neither shall exercise or move himself, or be baned. For al exercise
carries humours throughout all the body, and stops the powers: wherefore
these manner of persons should be kept in rest, such meates, drinks,
medicines, should be given to them which should attenuate or dissolve the
grosnes of the humours without notable heate, as Oximell, barley water, mulse,
if the patient abhor not honey. And forasmuch as in ye said persons commonly
there is abundance of wind about the stomach, therefore pepper, specially long
pepper or white is very convenient to be used, and the medicine before written,
called Diaspoliticum. When the humours are dissolved, then it is good to
drink white wine, or small claret wine moderately.

Lassitude extensiue. CAP. 4.
WHen one thinks that he doth seele a swelling or boiling of the body, where
indeed there doth not appear in sight or touching any smelling, that is called
lassitude extensiue, if it happens without exercise, or vehement moving: this
doth happen of excessive multitude of humours, which do extend the muscules or
filles. In this no sorenes is felt, but only an heaviness with extention or
thrusting out of the body. And because that there is abundance of blood in the
body, best remedy is to be let blood about the elbow or ankle, after to be
purged, then to use soft frycasies with oils before rehearsed, afterward much
rest and temperate bathes, and meates lacking sharpness and being abstersiue.

Lassitude, with the feeling of inflammation. CAP. 5.
IF without any moving, the muscules and flesh arise upon the body as it
smells with great pains and exceeding heate, then soon after follows most
hottest fevers, except it be prevented by letting of blood, that in abundance,
and almost to swooning: but it were more sure to be let blood twice in one day,
the first time without swooning, at the next time swooning is not to be feared.
If the grief be in the neck or head, the blood must be let of the vein
called Cephalea, or the shoulder vein. If it be in the bulk or uppermost part
of the body, then must the vein be cut, which is called Basilica, or the
innermost vein. If all the body be grieved, then cut the vein which is called
Mediana, or the middle vein. If a fever remain after blood letting, then
order him with the diet of them that have fevers, which ye shall find written
hereafter. If no fever remain, then use moderate fricasies and little eating,
and that of meates having good juice, increasing by little and little to the
natural diet.

Diet of them that are ready to fall into sickness. CAP. 6.
NOw to return eftsoones to speak of diet, it is to be remembered, that they
which are ready to fall into diseases, they are prepared thereunto either by
repletion or superfluous humours or else by cruditie, or malice of humours
which are in them. As touching the first, the general diet must be such, as
thereby the humours may be attenuate, and by convenient evacuation, brought to
a moderate quantity.

As for the second must be corrected with meates and drinks of contrary
qualities, having always respect to the age of the person, time of the year,
place of habitation, and most specially the universal complexion. For choler
offending in an old man, in winter time in a cold country, or the person being
of his natural complexion, fleumatick or melancholy, would not be so
abundantly expulsed or subdued, as if it be in one young and lusty, in the
hot summer, in the countries where the Sun fervently burns, or the person
of his proper nature is very choleric.

And in likewise contrary. Wherefore every man knowing his own natural
complexion, with the quality of the humour that offends, let him make
temperance his chief cooke, and remembering that which I have before declared,
ordain to himself such diet, as may reform the offence with none or little
annoyance to his universal complexion. And if he can so do, he shall happily
escape, not only diverse sicknesses, but also the most pernicious danger,
proceeding of corrupted drugs or spices, whereof some covetous apothecaries
do make medicines, maugre the heads of good and well learned Physicians.

Sickness most common to peculiar times of the year and ages. CAP. 7.
ALthough I do not intend to write of the cure of egritudes or sicknesses
confirmed, as well because it might be reputed in me a great presumption, as
also for as much as it were very perilous, to diuulgate that noble science to
common people, not learned in liberal sciences and Philosophie, which be
required to be sufficiently in a Physician. And moreover many books of
Hippocrates and Galen ought to be read, before that one do take upon him the
general cure of men's bodies, yet not withstanding I trust I may without any
note of arrogance write, what discases do most happen in sundry times of the
year, and ages of men and women, with some significations, whereby the
discrasie or distemperature of the body is perceived, to the intent that the
Physician being far off, may be truly informed, considering that vrines far
carried do often deceive them, and likewise lack of the sight of the patient,
and inquisition of things which do precede or follow the sickness. And with
this I trust none honest and charitable Physician will be offended, but rather
give to me thanks for my diligence, in the advancing of their estimation,
which by lack of perfect instruction hath been appayred.

Sicknesses of spring time.
Diseases proceeding of melancholy, as madness, falling sickness, bleedings,
squinces, poses, hoarsenes, coughs, lepries, scabs, ach in the joints.

Sicknesses of Summer.
Many of the said diseases, also fevers, continual hot fevers, fevers
tertiane, quartaine, vomits, flires, watering of eyes, pains of the ears,
blisters and sores of the mouth and sweatings.

Sicknesses of autumn.
Diverse of summer sicknesses, opilations of the spleen, dropsies,
consumptions, stranguilions, costiuenes, ach in the huckle bones, shortness of
wind, fretting of the bowels, falling sickness, and melancholic diseases.

Sicknesses of Winter.
Stiches and griefs in the sides, inflammation of the lungs, rheumes, coughs,
pains in the breast, sides, and loins, headache, and palsies.

Sicknesses happening to children.
When they be n^ borne, there do happen to them sores in the mouth called
Aphte, vamiting, coughs, watching, fearfulness, inflammations of the navel,
moisture of the ears. When they breed teeth, itching of the gummes, fevers,
cramps, and laskes.

When they wax elder, then be they grieved with kernels, openness of the mould
of the head, shortness of wind, the stone of the bladder, worms in the belly,
waters, swelling under the chin, and in England commonly purpilles, measiles,
and small pockes.

Sicknesses happening to young men from 14. years of age.
Fevers quotidiane, tertiane, quartaine, hot fevers, spitting or vomiting of
blood, pluresies, diseases of the sides, inflammation of the lunges, lethargies,
frenzy, hot sicknesses, choleric passions, costiuenes of vehement laskes.

Sicknesses of age.
Difficulty of breath, rheumes with coughs, stranguilion, and difficulty in
pissing, ach in the joints, diseases in the rains, swimmings in the head,
palsies, itching of al the body, lack of sleep, moisture in the eyes and
ears, dullness of sight, hardness of hearing, tissicknes or shortness of breath.

Although many of the said sicknesses do happen in every time and age, yet
because they be most frequented in the said times and ages, I have written them
to the intent that in the ages and times most inclined unto the, such things
might be then eschewed, which are apt to engender the said diseases.

The general significations and tokens of sickness. CAP. 8.
IF the body be hotter, colder, moyster, dryer, leaner, fuller, the colour more
pale or swart, the eyes more hollow than is accustomed to be, it signifies
that the body is disposed to sickness, or already sick. The brain sick.
Raving. Forgetfulness. Fantasy. Humours coming from the roof of the mouth,
the eyes, the nose, or the ears. Watch. Sleep.

The heart sick. Difficulty of breath. Trembling of the heart. Beating of the
pulse. Fevers. Cold. Diversity of colours. Grief about the heart.

The liver sick. Lack or abundance of humours. The form of the body
altered. Paleness. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrements accustomed.
Pain in the place of the liver. Swelling. Difficulty of breath.

The stomach sick. Concoction flow or quick. Appetite of moist or dry, dull or
quick. Separation of excrements moist, or hard with their colours. Yexing.
Belching. Uomiting with pain difficulty of breath. Urine much or little with
the colour substrace too red, or too pale, too thick, or too thin.

The breast sick. Difficulty of breath. Cough. Spitting. Pain in the breast.



This have I written not to give judgment thereby, but only for the patient
to have in a readiness, to the intent that whatsoever he feels, or perceives
in every of the said things, thereof to instruct his Physician whereunto he may
adapt his counsel and remedies.

Of vrines. CAP. 9.
FOrasmuch as now a days the most common judgement in sickness is by vrines,
which being far carried, or much moved, or standing long, after that it is
made, the form thereof is so altered, that the Physician shall not perfectly
perceive the natural colour nor contents, although it be never so well chafed
at the fire, as Actuarius and other great learned men do affirm. I will
therefore somewhat speak of vrines, not so much as a Physician knows, but as
much as is necessary to every man for to perceive the place and cause of his
grief, whereby he may the better instruct the Physician.

First in urine four things are to be considered, that is to say, the
substance, the colour, the regions or parts of the urine, and the contents or
things therein contained.

Also forasmuch as in the body of man be four qualities, heate, cold,
moisture, and drith, two of them heate cold, are causes of the colour, drith
and moisture, are causes of the substance. Moreover in urine, being in a
vessel apt thereunto to be seen are three regions. The lowest regio in the
bottom of the urinal, containing the spaces of two fingers or little more.
The middle region, from whence the lowest ended unto the circle. The highest
region is the circle. The highness of the colour signifies heate: the pale,
black, or green, signifies cold. Also the grossenes or thickness of the
urine, signifies moisture, the clearness or thinnes, signifies drith.

The colours of the vrines.
Colour of bright gold. Colour of gilt.
Perfect digestion.
Red as a red apple or cherry. Base red, like to Bole armoniake, or Saffron
dry. Red glowing like fire.
Excess of digestion.
Colour of a beasts liver. Colour of dark red wine. Green like to celeworts.
Adustion of humours.
Leadie colour. Black as ink. Black as horne.
Feeblenes or mortification of nature, except it be in purging of melacholy.
White clear as water. Gray as a horne. White as why. Colour of a Camels
hair.
Lack of digestion.
Pale like to broth of flesh sodden.
The beginning of digestion.
Citrine colour or yellow. Subcitrine or paler.
The middle of digestion.
White and thin betokens melancholy to have dominion. White and thick,
signifies fleume. Red and thick, betokens sanguine. Red and thin
betokens choler to have the sovereignty.
The substance of the urine. CAP. 10.
AT the first pissing all vrines well nigh do appear thin, as long as they do
abide warm: for natural heate, during the time that it prevails, suffers
not that the liquor, which is the substance of the urine, to congeal or be
thick for any occasion, but after that heate is gone, some vrines shortly,
sorne a longer time after wax thick. Likewise sometime some are pissed
thicker, after wax clear, some remain still as they were made, some be meetly
thick as they were troubled, some very thick gross. They that wax clear,
soon do gather that which is thick into the botome of ye urinal, some remain
troubled, yt grossenes notwithstanding gathered in the bottom. Semblably the
diversity of thin or subtle vrines must be perceived, that is to say, that
some are very subtle, as water, some less subtle, some in a mean between
thick and thin.

Of things contained in the urine, some do descend down to the bottom, and
^ee called in a greek word Hypostasis, in english some call it the grounds,
some the residence, which if it be white, light rising up from the bottom of
the urinal, like a pear, it signifies health, if it be of any other figure
or colour, it betokens some annoyance. If like things be seen in the middle
of the urinal, they be called sublations, if they approach unto the highest
region of the urine, they be named clouds, in latin Nebulae. The grounds or
residences not perfect, some is like little red vetches, and is called in
latin Orobea, some is like to bran of wheat ground, and severed from the
meal, and is called brannie residence, in latin Furfurea, some be like unto
plates having breadth and length without thickenesse, and may be named plat
residence, in latin Laminea, some is like to meal, wheat, or barley, and may
be named mealy residence, in latin Similacea.

There is also seen in the urine like to white hairs, some longer, some
shorter, sometime like to rags somewhat red. There is also seen in the
uttermost part of the urine, sometime a ^ome of froth, sometimes bells or bubbles,
sometime there swims in the urine, a thing like a cobweb, otherwhile there
is about the circle, as it were the renting of cloth, sometime there is in like
urine the motes of the sun, sometime like the matter of a sore, otherwise
like the seed of a ma, also gravel or sand. And in these things may be diverse
colours, some white, some red, some between both, some yelow, some gray, and
(...) black. All this must be diligently marked, and thereof separately to
advertise the physician, unto whom I refer the judgment of the sickness for the
cause before rehearsed, and for as^ as the judgment of them is very subtle.

Semblably of ordure whether it be very thin or very thick, what other
matter issues out with it, what colour it is of, the savour very great, little
or none if it were easily expulsed, or painefully, how oft or how seldom.

Moreover of sweat what colour it is of, and of what savour, if in tasting it
be salt, sour, bitter, or unsavoury.

Also the vomit if it be of one colour or many, if it do smell horribly, of what
humour it had most abundance, if it were fasting, or after meals, if it were
painful or easy.

Likewise spittle whether it be thick or thin, or mixed with blood, or matter
corrupt, accordingly of the humour issuing out at the nose, and if that be
blood, then whether it be red, watery or black.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, to advertise the Physician of the diet used
by the patient, as well before the sickness, as in the time of the sickness, his
age, the strength of his body, his exercise and place, where he longest abode
in his youth, whether it were high or low, watery or dry, hot or cold.

This I trust shall be sufficient to instruct a physician, he that desires to
know more particularly hereof, let him read the books of Hippocrates, Galen,
Cornelius Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and diverse other late writers, for this
little treatise may not receive it.

The precepts of the ancient physician Diocles to King Antigonus. CAP. 11.
WE will now divide the body of man into four parts, the head, the bulk
called in Latin Thorax, which contains the breast, the sides, the stomach
and entrails. The belly, called in latin Venture, contains the paunch and
bowels. Also the bladder called in latin Vesica, in the which name, is also
contained the conduits by the which urine passes. When any disease approaches
to the head, these tokens do commonly precede, swimming in the head, headache,
heaviness of the brows, sounding in the ears, pricking in the temples, the
eyes in the morning do water or wax dim, the smelling is dull, the gummes do
swell. When thou feel such tokens, forthwith purge the head with somewhat,
not with vehement medicines, but taking Isope or organum, the crops of them
boyle with white or claret wine half a pint, and therewith gargarise your
mouth fasting, until the fleum be purged out of your head: this is the easiest
medicine in diseases of the head.

It is also very wholesome to gargarise the mouth breast with honey water,
whereunto mustard is put and mingled, but first the head must be rubbed with a
warm cloth, that the fleum may easily come out of the head. And if these
tokens be neglected, these manner of sicknesses do follow soon after, bleared
eyes and humours letting the sight, cleftes in the ears, swellinges in the
neck full of matter called the kings evil, corruption of the brains, poses
or rheumes, heaviness of the head, and toothache. When the bulk is like to
suffer any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens, all the body is in a
sweat, the spittle is either salt or bitter, or choleric, the sides and
shoulders do ache without any occasion, the patient gapes often, also there
doth happen much waking, suffocations or lack of breath, thirst after sleep,
the mind is vexed with heaviness, also the breast and arms are very cold, and
the hands do tremble. Against these things, thie remedy may be provided. After
a modederate supper assay to vomit without any medicine, vomit is also
profitable, which meat doth follow. He that in such wise will vomit, let him
eat hastily small radish roots, townkerses, roket, senuy, or purslaine, and
drink after it a great quantity of warm water, and provoke himself to vomit.
He that sets little by the said tokens, let him fear these sickenesses
following, the pluresie, the sickness of the lungs, melancholy or madness, sharp
fevers, the lethargy, inflammation with yexing. If any sickness be toward
the belly, they may be espied by these tokens, ye belly is first wrapped
together, and in it self is troubled, all meates and drinks do seem bitter
in taste, he feels heaviness in his kneees, a stifnes in his loins, and
weariness in all his body, without any occasion, a sleepiness in his legs, with a
little fever: when thou feel these tokens, mollify the belly, not with
medicine, but with good order of diet, for it is best and most sure, to use
those things, whereof lightly may ensue none annoyance, in the number of them
are beetes boiled in water of honey, Garlic sodden, Malowes, Sorrel,
Mercurie, and all things condite in honey. All these do expel the ordure of
the belly: but if any of the said signs, do more and more increase, the
liquor wherein the seed of Carthamus called also Cnicus is boiled, is a
pleasant sure medicine, small cole wortes boiled in a good quantity of water,
the licoure thereof in measure two pintes, saving the third part of a pint with
honey and salt being drunken, shall profit much. Cicer the pulse called in
latin Eruum, in english (I suppose) chits in water, druk fasting hath ye same
effect. To the which set little by ye said tokens, these diseases do suddenly
happen. Flux of the belly, bloody flux, slippernes of the bowels, pains in
the guts, ach in the huckle bones, the fever tertian, the gout, the apoplexy
or palsley in the limbs. Hemerhoydes, aching of joints. When the bladder is
toward any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens, fulness felt after
little meat, breaking wind downward and upward, paleness of colour in all
the body, heavy or troublous sleeps, the urine pale and passing forth
painefully, swelling about the coddes, privy members. When these tokens
appear, the it is expedient to have remedy of odoriferous things, which do
expel urine, which shall be done without any peril, with the roots of
fenell and parcely steeped one or two days in good white wine, and to drink
thereof fasting every morning three ouces and two drams, with the water of
wild Carets or Elicampane, which of these is next at hand, every of them
have like effect. Also water wherein the peason called in latin Ciceres are
steeped, being drunk with wine is like commodious. He that neglects the
said tokens, let him look for these sicknesses following, the dropsy, the
greatness of the spleen, grief in the liver, ye stone, ach of back, or pains in
the rains, ye difficulty of urine, fulness of the belly. In all these things
that we have spoken of, we shall give to children mast easy medicines, to
men those that be stronger in working. This diet of Diocles, although at this
time it seems not most pleasant, nor according to the practise now used, yet
being tempered with that which I have before remembered, some thing may be found
in it, which being experienced, may be as commodious for the health of mans
body, as the diet which is more curious or pleasant.

Of them in whose stomach meat is corrupted. CAP. 12.
THey in whom customably meat is corrupted, let them before that they eat any
meat, assay to vomit, drinking sweet wine, abstain drinking sweet wine,
abstain from meats that engender botches, inflammations, and fumous
ructuations or vapors, take such as nourish good juice, and choose them out
which do mollify the belly, and at sundry times take them. It is also good
to take temperatly that which loses the belly, as the medicine called Picra,
and to abstain from such things whereby ill juice is gathered, and do
engender sicknesses, hard to be cured or never, as gowtes, bone-ach, pain of
the rains, c.

Of the virtue of meates. CAP. 13.
HE that is studious about the conservation of health, he needs to know the
virtue of meats. The meat which hath ver^ue to extenuate, or make humours
subtle, it opens the pores, and brings forth that which is fast in the
flesh, it makes that which is clammy subtle, and doth extenuateor relent that
which is fat, it brings forth that which abides long in the belly: but that
which is eaten, is a superfluity, watery, and choleric, and at length makes
melancholic blood: wherefore much using of them is prohibited, specially to
them that are choleric, and only serves for them that are replete with
fleume, crude or vndigested humours, clammie or fat. The diet of fatting
things, doth nourish abundantly, so that the stomach and liver do digest well,
meat of good juice makes good blood, but yet stops the liver and spleen.
These do they, which make fat humours only, as the pulse called Lenticula,
and they that are slimy like mallowes: some do make hot humours and be also
slimy, as fishes with hard shells. Finally, the diet which doth extenuate and
make lean, is more sure for keeping of health, then that which fats much.
Nourishing meates would be therefore moderately used, when a man perceives
himself to have need thereof, it may be most surely used of them that be
exercised temperatly, and can sleep when they list. They that cannot sleep by
reason of exercise, let them eschew fatting meats, let none idle person attempt
to use them. In the preservation of health, sluggardie is the greatest
mischief. Like as temperate moving is good, so is the meat which between
thick and thin, unto mans health most convenient, which engenders blood,
according to the competent constitution of mans body, and therefore it is to
be chiefly used. Meat of ill juice is always noyfull, wherefore it ought to be
eschewed. Likewise the variety of meates is to be observed diligently, for it
is a great thing to couple well together things of contrary virtues: for if
they be not well digested, that which is received may bring displeasure.

A Diet preservative in the time of pestilence. CAP. 14.
THe bodies most apt to be infected, are specially sanguine, next choleric,
then flengmatike, last melancholic: for in them the humour being cold and
dry, is most unapt to receive putrefaction, having also strait passages by
which the venom must pass. The diet convenient for that time, is to abstain
from meates inflaming and opening the pores: also from heate of the sun, fro
too much heate or fire, or garments, from every hot herb, much use of tart
things, except Onyons and Cicorie, or Radish with vinegar, for they do resist
against venom: from wine very fumish, exercise incontinent after meals, from
sweating, from all things that will cause opilation, and putrification: from
things hot and moist, where moisture hath the dominion in a degree, specially
being not sufficiently boiled: also from milk, except it be in a little
quantity, and that with a little sugar. Fruits and herbs cold and dry, and
therewith sour or somewhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eat figs,
grapes, or sweet cherries, eat after them of an Orange with salt. If ye eat
things cold and moist, as Cucumbers, Melons, fish soft and fresh, or Damsens,
eat by and by after some Fenell and Orange with salt, drinking therewith a
draught of good wine. Beware of Mushromes, much Purslane, Gourds, and all other
things, which will soon putrefy: notwithstanding, I will not forbid eating of
Lettise with a few Mints, or mixed with Cinamom. All things so wre are
commended as well in diet conseruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or
healthy, except where there is straightness of the breast, or weakness of the
stomach, then ought they to be tempered with sugar, salt, Almond milk,
Cinamom, pepper, senell, saffren, eggs, and some thing that is fat and vnctuous.
Capers are good to be used with vinegar. Cheese very fat and salt is not
commended, no more is Coleworts or any kind of pulse, except chittes, great
peason, rapes, nor spinach is good. Also there be forbidden roket mustard, much
wine and eggs, except they be eaten with sorrel sauce, vinegar, or juice of
Orenges, parsley, and parsnips be good. New wines be noyfull, let the meat be
somewhat more then drink, but yet sustain not too much hunger, nor thirst,
beware of lechery, of cloudy weather and close, eschew much resort or throng
of people, winds coming from fens or moors, from sleep at noone, use with
your meat this powder, saunders red half an ounce, Cinamom 3. drams a half,
saffron half a dram. After your meat eat a little of coriander seed well
prepared. In ye morning at a seperate fire, kembe your head backward, cleanse
your body head of all superstuities, use also moderate fricasies with sweet
perfumes and odours, wash oftentimes your face hands with pure vinegar mixed
with rose water. In cold weather mix it with mints, Balm, Rue, or Myrtes,
and sometimes with cloves: in hot summer with roses or violets. Above all
things use to make white wine, good white vinegar roset, water of roses, in
equal portions, put thereunto a little setwal, or of the rind of a Cytron, and
drink thereof a little, and oftentimes wash therewith your hands, and visage.
Medicines preservative against the pestilence, which be always most ready, are
these, a fig with rue, and a walnut eaten fasting, also triacle, or mithridate,
to old men a dram weight, to young half a dram, or a scruple dissolved into
vinegar and rose water, and in water of tormentill, scabiose, or balm, if the
plague be in Summer: if it be in winter, put to the waters some white wine.
Also the pills called commonly Pillulae rasis (but in deed they were invented
by Rufus) are very excellent, specially if the aloe, which is in it be washed,
and thereunto added a little Bolus amenus Terra sagillata. And if the person
be of hot complexion, a quantity of sorrel seed, and red coral, this
confectionated with syrope of cytrons in cold complexions, or to old men with
white wine, use them every third day, one pill at a time, three hours or
four before dinner or supper. If ye take ^riacle or mythridate, abstain from
meat at the least six hours after. A piece of the root of a settuall, borne
in the mouth, preserves from infection. In like wise doth sorrel chewed
fasting, and the juice sucked down. To poor men, Marcilius was wont to give
a toste of bread steeped in vinegar, with a piece of an Onion, or Rue. All
things which be cordial, that is to say, which do in any wise comfort the
heart, do resist pestilence, vehement anger, or heaviness be very pernicious.

Other more exquisite and costly preseruations, I purposely pass over, which
Marcilius and other physicians do write so abundantly, for as much I desire to
be in this work compendious. One thing I had almost forgotten, that there is
no better preservative, then so^ie from the place corrupted betime and far
off, and to let none approach you, that hath made their abode where the plague
is fervent. Moreover receive not into your house any stuff, that comes out
of a house wherein any person hath bin infected. For it hath been seen, that
such stuff lying in a coffer fast shut by the space of two years, after that
coffer hath been opened, they which have stood nigh to it have been
infected, and some after have dyed. But here I always except the power of God,
which is wonderful, and also merciful, above mans reason, or counsel,
preserving or striking whom, when, and where it shall like his majesty: to
whom be glory and praise everlasting. Amen.

Thus make I an end of this treatise, desiring them that shall take profit
thereby, to defend it against envious disdain, on whom I have set the
adventure for the love that I bear to my country, requiring all honest
Physicians to remember, that the intent of my labour was, that me and women
reading this work, and observing the counsayles therein, should adapt thereby
their bodies to receive more sure remedy, by the medicines prepared by good
Physicians in dangerous sicknesses, they keeping good diet and informing
diligently the same physicians of the manner of their affects, passions, and
sensible tokens. And so shall the noble and most necessary science of physic,
with the ministets thereof, escape the slander which they have of long time
sustained, and according to the precept of the wise man be worthily honoured,
for as much as the highest God did create the physician for mans necessity, and
of the earth created medicine, and the wise man shall not abhore it. Thus fare
ye well gentle readers, and forget me not with your good report, and pray to God
that I be never worse occupied.

FINIS.

