Here follows Three Practyses, now used at Mountpyller, by mon sire Emery. a
romayne borne in Rome, a Doctoure in Astronomye Phesyke, and other doth
practyse the same, First an oil, or ontment, and a powder, and the.iii. a
water, for many Infyrmytes and deseases for the health of the body.

These is practysed

Emery, and many diverse other.

in Mountpyller by master Iohn.



Oil of Roses, is thus made, take a pound of Roses and four of oil, rub
them well betwyxt thine hands, and put them in a vessel of glass with oil, ye
mouth of the vessel stopped, set it against the hot son.xii. days, and so
do thereto fresshe roses, and let it stand against the son, other.xii. days
And if thou voylte make more, let it stand longer, and cleanse it and keep it
to thine use. The virtues of this oil be these, it avails against ayge of
the heed in a hot cause, as in a Fever, against hete of the stomach wherther
it be anointed therewith or drunk, for it is cold dry.

Of oil of mandrage.
Oil of Mandrage, is cold and moyste, it avails against a^yge of ye heed,
and to them that hath the Franes^e, and pobagre of hot humours. It is made
thus of the apples of mandrage of hennebelle of popye. take and put them in
oil, by twelfe days against the son, and than seth it to wasting of the
Iuse at a slow fire, and in party of that oil resolves and opium, than keep
it to thy use. Or it is thus made with the iuse of mandrage meddled with ye
sedes of henebelle, and of popye boyle them together in a dowble vessel to
wasting of the iuse, a dowble vessel is said in thus manner, take a caudron and
put therein water, in the water put the vessel that conteyneth the oil, but
meddle them not together, afterward cleanse it, and put to the clensynge also
opium, and afterward boyle it a little, and keep it to thine use.

Oil of Lylye.
Oil of lylye is cold, and it hath amytigatyf virtue. it avails for akyng of
ye heed, of a hot Fever against brennynge of the stomach, and of the
entrails thus it is made grynde the flows of lylye well put them in wine
oil, against the son.xii days. stop the vessel than with soft fire, seth
it to wasting of the wine, and keep it in a dowble vessel and afterward
cleanse it, and keep it to thine use.

Oil of yuy.
Oil of yuy, avails against akynge of the heed of hete or of a Fever, or of
other cause against fervor of the stomach, and of the entrails, thus it is
made gryde the levies of yuy, and put them in wine oil, and in the foresaid
manner seth them and clese them, and keep them to thine use.

Oil of populeon.
Oil of populeon, is cold it avails against theforesaid eueles that comes
of hete, thus it is made, gather the tender croppes of pepuleon in ver, and
grynde them, and put them in wine and oil, and seth them in the foresaid
manner, cleanse them and keep them to thine use.

Oil de bay.
Oil de bay is hot, and it is made in the manner of oil de olyf, or else it is
made thus grynde baize and when they be ground, let them lye four days, and
with hot hands knede it and then put water there to, and let it seth well
lunge in a cauldron, and than cleanse it thorughe a cloth, and when it is cold
gather it that swymmeth above and keep it, to thine use for that is god.

Oil of Feuerfoy.
Oil of Fetherfoy, is hot it avails to them that hath the Podagre or the
Palsy, of cold cause do all that suffers, because of flume any evil, and
thus it is made. put the sede of Feuerney in moyste earth put clothe there
under, and let it be there.ix. days, and afterward grynde it strongly with
oil, put it in a bag and clese it so, or else it is made in another manner,
take of Feuertney three pound of oil, four pound make poudre of the
Feuerney, do it in the oil nyne days after cleanse it and keep it to thine
use.

Oil of Sauyne.
Oil of Sauyne is made thus take Sauyne and grynde it wonder small, do it in
oil three days, or four than seth it to the mydle.

Oil of Byrche.
Oil of Byrche is made thus, the byrche when it is ripe grynde it and seth it
in water, cleanse it let rest ande till it be cold, and the fat that fleteth
above gather it keep it

An oyntement of elm.
AN oyntement of Elm, it avails against brennynge of hot water of fire,
take oil and new fresshe greece, and of the tenderness of the Elm of each three
vnces, and water that suffices, and make it thus grynde the greece well, and
dyssolue the oil in water, and put the branches therein and seth it well with
a slow fire, and when they ben soden grynde them all together in a mortar and
meddle it besely and clente it, and keep it to thine use

Oil of pulyoll, or hullewort.
Oil of Pulyoll or Hulleworte take the croppes with the levies flowers and
sethe them in oil in a dowble vessel, this oil doth away cold causes, but
the specyall virtue of it is if the regyon of mates be anointed therewith, it
comfort and dries the cold humours, and yields it able to conceynynge.

Oil of Eggs.
Oil of Eggs, take.xx. yelkes of eggs and bren them somewhat in pan till
they be black, and then take the pan of the fire, and set it ^owynge and
thryst the yolks of the eggs, and there shall distylle out a manner of fatness,
that is called oil, the specyall virtues of this oil, be to aswage brennynge,
and scalding and to do away impetigme and serpetigme and other.

Oil of whet.
Oil of whet is thus made, put whet betwyxte two brennynge plates of yren,
and thurste it there shall distylle a manner of black oil that with a fire
shall be anointed upon red blaynes impetigme, serpe rigme. Also it avails in
brenynge.

Thus ends the First practyse of oils. And hereafter follows the practyse
of Powdres.
POwdre against dum grain, and the palsy take prymerose, solsecle, lauandre
advance, sauge, rue, betoyne, of each three penny weight, of rosemaryne twelfe
penywight of cardre sede of karsen, of time, of syleris, motane, of each nyne
penny weight, and of pyony yclensed, nyne penny weight of castorea, nyne penny
weight of gynger, of galygale, of canell, of clowes, of nutmygges, ligni aloes,
cassia lignea, of each on nyne penny weight, sal geinme, nyne penny weight of
sugar, and uncle and a half, and make powder of all these.

A powder against cardyacle.
A Powder against the Cardyacle and against to much feblenesse take Champhore
musk of each three halfpeny weight, shauynge of yuory, of gold, and silver, of
either threpeny weight,

Powder against flux.
A Powder against flux of blode of the nosethrylles, take encense mastyke,
sandragone, nyne of each three penny weight, brenne them in a shelle over the
fire, and meue them till they wax black, and make there of soryll powdre and
cast that in.

Powdre for delicate men.
A Powdre for delicate men, to coforte dygestyon, and to amend the sight, take
Canell cardemoi and piperis, soleris, maiorane, cruceantos, calamite, of each
half an ounce, nutmeges, opiu, peradis, selis, of each an ounce consex a penny
weight, salgeme half an ouce. ferrugis, well tepered two vnces, make powdre of
these and use them.

Powdre against theouar.
A Powdre against the quartayn and vice of the spleen, take Coryandre earn.
serni combusti of each ix. penny weight anellanes clesed.ix.

Powdre for wounds.
A Powdre to make for wounds and botches valerya bu ruet.

Powdre of Betoyne.
A Powdre made of Betoyne and drunk with water is good for dygestyon, and for
the cowghe, and also for a wound in the heed.

Here ends the practyse of powdres. And follows the practyse of waters,
necessary.
WAter that is good for man sight take sauge, fenell, veruayne betayne
egrymonye, sanamundy, camedrios eufrasye, pympernell, tryfoyle, few, of each a
like much, grynde them well in a mortar, and afterward take the powdre of
aloen, and a little camphorie, ming together with euerose and stylit and that
water is profytable for all manner dyse ases of iyen it restores sight that is
lost.

water of Coperose.
WAter of Coperose, take coperose and grynde it and put a little water to the
powdre, and let it stand a day and a night and strain it thorughe a cloth,
this water is good for iyen and the canker in the mouth, for holimet anger in
the visage.

water to sle foul worms.
WAter to sle foul worms, take Arthro, wormewode, sauyne, the water of these
sleyth the vermin in a mans iye lyddes, and in his share beneth the navel.

water of dragons.
WAter of Dagons, the man yt drynketh water of dragons it sleth the worms
within him, who so washes the fretynge and gnawynge.

water of Tormentyll.
WAter of Tormentyll, who so drynketh the water thereof it coforteth man maw
it cleanses benyme, swellynge swynasy it doth away.

water of Bytayne.
WAter of Bytayne is good for the ache and for sore iyen.

water of Egrymone.
WAter of Egrymone is good for hory wounds doth away ye slitche.

water of auence.
WAter of anence and ming it with honey and stylle it, and it bynemyth the
stench of woudes helyth well.

water of bawme.
WAter of Bawme bynemeth stench of the teeth.

water of lunge de befe.
WAter of lunge de Befe, is good for the Cardyacle.

water of pympernell.
WAter of Pympernelle, ^ylage, wey breed hylworte, flosc^. beaver lenes,
selerquicle take all these and wasshe them well, and stamp them and styll them
in a styllawry.

water of Fenell.
WAter of Fenell is good for narownes in the brist when it is stylled.

water of Columbyne.
WAter of Columbyne will caste out broken bones, and water of ache when it is
stylled, who so drynketh it or the iuse of columbyne,

water of mynte
WAter of mynte is good to comfort the stomach, it cures bytynge of an houde
if it be groude with salt.

water of Valerian.
WAter of valerian who so ever drynketh of it divers days fasting, he causes
and purges the Renys his breast, and it causes all fleume about the heart to
void, comfort ye stomach, and claryfieth marvelously the nature of man,
causes wealth, use this often in the morning fasting and at even, what ma^st
im^eth the rote and temper it with swore creme and drink it in ye morning and
at evening all his nature shall be safe, and it shall make him well of nature,
he that uses it often times though he be very dry of nature, he shall have in
short space enough and causes to pysse well.

Here follows of the most profytablest time that beth to draw blode of men
and women. Now it is to say al the days most profytable and best.
IN the beginning of Marche, in the.vi. and the.x. day, thou shalt draw out
blode of the right arm. In the beginyng of Apryll on the lest arm, and that
on the xi. day for thy sight. In the end of Maii of which arm thou will and
that against the Fever, and if thou so doest, neither thou shalt less thy
sight no thou shalt have no fever as lunge as thou live.

^ eth this practy^e of ^ Emerye. ^ ely Imprinted ^ wire.


