Here is a new Book, called the defence of age / and recovery of youth /
translated out of the famous Clarke and right expert medicine Arnold de Nova
Villa / very profytable for all men to know.



Unto the noble and virtuous ^y Lady Marget dowgses, Nice, unto the most noble
crysten, prince Henry ye. viii. king of Englande of France, defender of ye
faith, under god supremeheed of ye Church of Englande, sister unto the most
noble thrysten prince Iames, king of Scottes daughter, unto the noble coutie
Archebald Earl of Anguysshe, Ionas D^lumde her vmbse seruyt^r de^ueth grace and
hesthe.
Sorry I am to offer unto your noble, and virtuous Ladyshyp so small a book,
were it not so that I am purposed to recompense your Ladyshyp, with a greater,
so that this may favourably be received (which to believe) the (...) nobleness,
and gentylnes that is in you, persuades me, also I hope that ye will consider
rather the heart of the gyuer then the gift it self which although it ^ small
in quatite, yet it is great in (...) this done, I shall desire ^ to preserve
your Ladyshyps noblen^

THe coseruacio of youth and withstanding of age, consists in the mayntenynge
of the powers, the spyrites, the natural heate of the body in their state and
temperancy: in the cofortyng and repayrynge of them being defertyue. For so
lunge as the powers, the spyrytes and the natural heate of man body are not
debylitate nor wekened, so lunge (I say) neither shall ye skin wrynkle, for
the debylyte of ye natural heate de^lynynge to coldenes and drynes through the
which the fode norisshement of the body is corrupted hindered: is cause of
rorrugacyon or wrynklyng of ye skin. For the meat being first dygested in
the stomach, and then shortly after sent in to every part of the body, is
dygested again of ye natural heate of the same part, where it is received:
than if that this natural heate be by any occasyon corrupted or destroyed: the
food also is sent to the same place, shall be likewise corrupted, then so
ensues corrugacyo of ye skin, whore hears, as ye may se in ye auncyent aged
men, when they be cold dry, for horenes comes of ye defect of natural
heate, the which defends the body fro age, age properly doth make ma cold
dry, therefore they be of ly^el blode, and the powers natural heate in them
very weke, unable to cococtyng dygestyng of meat, wherefore there increace
great plety of humidites and crude raw humours, therefore the three sprytes the
three digestions in age be decayde, in the raynes ye debilite of heate, this
follows with ye course of time, ye which course may be somewhat let defended by
Physic, by avoiding of such accidental causes as do induce age, as sorrow,
study, heuynes, desperation, over much venery, labour, traueyl, or rest, when
age by any of these causes is come, then to amputat or cut away the cause by
things apropriat. And for the preseruacyo of the powers, is no better thing
then a syrupe made of wine and sugar, myxte together. iii. parts of wine,. ii.
parts of sugar drunk with fair water, or borage water. This syrupe is both
meat and drink, and in it be two things confycte together, which are most
friendly to nature, when the powers be weke they need such things as may
coforte them, both meates, drynkes, and other spices, and moystynge medycynes,
and this is a very secrete thing. Corrugacyon and revelling of the skin
require such things, as do cleanse make plain smooth skin, with certain
oils, waters, oyntementes. Goodlynes and fresshenes of colour, is by fedinge
upon such meates drynkes, as do engender good laudable blode, are light of
dygestyon, and by such things, as do cleanse ye blode corrupted, and the other
powers is, ouermoch euacuacyon, or to often lettynge of blode, or such other
like things. These things may be amended with thus, earynge of chekyns, and
chekyn broth, with due rest and sleep, and also with sweet and odoryferous
things, and such other like.

Things engenderynge evil and rotten flume, be fruits, fysshe, all things
made of milk, such other, of the which be engendered watery humours, not
dygestyble in the members, then in the same members it causes horenesse, and
wryncles. But among all other thing{is} there is nothing, the which so
strongly doth cause a man to loke oldely, as fear and desperation. For because
in that passion and effectyon, all the natural hete of the body doth resort
inward, and forsakes the outward parts, and yt most chefely, when the manes
complexyon is disposed to the same, and that is the cause that many being
^os^e, turmoiled, and vexed, with this worldly storms so day^ly their heer
wax whore, or white.

Now things that do resyste or put away these causes, are chose the joyce of
Pomegranate, chefely gold, the joyce of Borage, of fumytorye, specyally grene
and puryfyed, and ye virtue of the rote of Playntayne and such other.

The rotten fleume is destroyed with the use of Myrabolaues composed, and Aloe
rosatum, and Agaryke, things to be had at the Apothecaries. And y^ where with
properly both melancholy fleume be expelled out of the body, is Eleborus niger,
called in English Bears foot, prepared by a certain manner unto few known.
For in the rectifying of ye mali cyousnesse of this herb, stands all the
secrete of his operation, for by him a man shall be altered from evil coplexion
to good, and it restores youth again, but it is not convenient for delicate
bodies and noble complexyous, therefore I will say little of him. Beware ye never
entermedle with this herb, without the aduysement and couceyll of some expert
and well learned Physician.

Also ^anthos composed with sugar, the which properly doth consume the fleume
and melaneoly being in the heed, and it tarries and lets the whore here's
coroborateth and strengneth the censes, and prologeth the life, chefely when a
quatite of it is disolued in aqua vita well and craftily made, sometime it is
disolued in wine, lies i it. ii. or. iii. days, then strained, so used
conveniently, according to the couceyll of a Physician.

Other things also there be, which quycken makes lusty ye body, as
Diacameron, Mirabolany, Chebuly composed, which by their property do consume
and waste the flematycke super fluytyes of the stomach do comfort him, and do
clarify the blode and be of great force against melancholy, and thuse of those
do comfort youth, and causes a man to wax yonge again, defends a man from
whore hears, also the decoction of scene with Diaboraginatum, the whey of gotes
milk and such other. And one of the chief thing{is}, whereby age is defended
and youth prolonged, is once in a month to have a vomyte, to expel the
fleumatyke humour, and once in a weke to receive aclyster, and specyally that
composed of the joyce of Mercury, walwort elder, and beat with half an ounce of
yeropegara, the which is a great secrete.

And also subiction made with yeropigra, or Cassia fistula, and the joyce of
fresshe Roses, preparate with sugre, is a goodly easer of nature, mynystred
wisely, and it is a blessyd medicine to make a* man soluble, and therewith also
it comfort the pryncypal members in man, and alters the evil dysposicio
of man to good, it opens opilatios or stoppynges. It coforteth the heart, and
cleanses it, and to speak of the praise of this medicine would require a lunge
process.

Other thing{is} also destroying and consuming the humours, which cause age
are those temperate Spices known to every body, Cloves, Cinam^me, Liquiryce,
and such other, but most pryncypally, when they are conficte incorporate with
good wine, and so (being first somewhat watered) received and drunken.

Also it is not unknown, howe that pylles made of myrtha, be of an excellent
goodness in the conseruacyon of health life, for it withstands putrefactio
rectifieth and sincereth that which is ready to putrefaction, wherefore this
Myrtha is confycte with such things as dead bodies are incered with all, to
defend the corse from putrefactio. And the fore said spyced wine, when it is
received of man, it spredeth it self abroad in ye parts of the body and
comfort all the parts of the body, and dries up the superfluous humydyties
of the body, also the powder of the same spices used with meat, profyteth
wonderfully.

How be it, if the man be of a dry dysposycyon, then shall it be needful to
adioyne to these spices, some more temperate thing, as the joyce of
Pomegranates, Rose water, Sugre, Lyckeryce, Resyus, and such like. Diacamero
restores dygestyon, los^e and comfort it, and Trifera passes all
declynynge, somewhat more to calidite. The natural hete then the meat coming
to the members being decayed or corrupted, which comes of putryfyed colour,
furthwith ensues corrugacyon, and old lokynge as ye may se in such as are
scaby, in any part of their body, for that part being enfected, it seems
ryuyled and old skin. The infection being once departed again, the skin
shows it self fair, smothe, and yongly, and to those gold preparate is
s^uerayne, the wine of Pomegranate, and this is specyal good for the lepry. And
this wine of granates taken and received howe ye list, hath properte to
extenate the humours, and to alaye the hete of the liver, and to comfort all
parts of mans body offended with heate, and it is good against wekenes of
heart, fortyfyeth the mouth of the stomach, comfort the heart. Also
Mirabolani Rebul^ conditi be very good both in hot and cold dyseases they
comfort the stomach, and dries up the superfluous moystenes of the same, and
be sides this they help the melancolicke people, they clarefy and make clear
the blode, and the spyrytes, neither is there any thing more excellent for
that purpose then these.

Also borage wine made (in time that grapes be gathered pressed) with must is
pryncipally good for melacoly, faint herted, and mad people, for it cleseth
the blode, takes away evil fantasies, and comfort all the regetyue power,
and encounters all corrupcion. The electuarye also of the Myrabolans used, is
a thing right often proved and allowed, to the conseruacion of health, and
prolongynge of the life, and to wax yonge again, for it comfort the
stomach, makes it apt lusty, cosumeth ye wa trynesse left of the fore fode,
the use of this electuarye withstands age, causes ma to live lunge by the
help of god.

Again certain suffumigations and savours made of convenient things, and
according as the man needs, is very profytable.

Bathing also temperatly without any great sweating so yt only the skin be
mundefyed and cleansed fro fylthynes, is wholesome and profytable, for thereby ye
powers are opened, and the superfluous humidities lurkynge within the skin,
be wasted and dried up.

But the use of good wine in the which such spices, as we have spoken of
before, have ben steped, and the virtue of them in it resolved, temperatly
taken with a little water myxte therewith in due season, shall pass and enter
in to all the hid ways of the body, and it shall dry up all the evil
humydyties, coforteth all the inward parts, perfectely doth open all manner of
opilactio or stoppynge, the which is secrete for the aparycyon or opening of
places opilat, or stopped, causes ye lively spyryt{is} to rune throughout
every part of the body, and causes the natural heate for to wax strong,
and to be of great force, but opilacion or stopping causes the contrary, for
the natural hete being conculcate, or strangled, not having the fre passage
through every part, is thereby debylytate and wekened, and so not suffycyent
and mighty to seperate the pure from the impure, whereupon the superfluous
humydyties rotten putrefyed be in the body much increased, and thereby
consequently ensues wrynkelinge of the flesh and skin, and age at hand.

An other also strong mean there is to defend age, and to recover youth
again, by abstynence, and conuenyet for bearing of your quantyte of meat,
unto such time as the body be brought very lowe, and made very spare, and then
to restore, and norysshe it again with laudable, wholesome, and good fode,
which hath a property, to engender clear and pure blode*

This point also do they observe the which make fat Oxen: whose flesh the
more it waxes lean and bare, ye more also doth it be come tender and yonge,
and the better afterwerde do they like and batten, and ye may also se the
practyse of this in such as be lately recovered from syckenesse.

But to be short, he yt will refrain age, and conserve youth, let him not be
neclygent in chosyng of his meat, that it be such, as may breed good,
clear, fat, thycke and viscous blode, and then may he withstand well age.

And when that such humydytyes, or moystenesse, which are in the body, and
crude humours are increased in man, then hath he need of such things which
do extenate and exiccat those superfluous moystenes, and such things as may
digest the crude or raw humours, sincere and depure the hole body.

Among other thing{is}, such as wax aged, have great need of calefactyon,
and humystation, that is to say* warming, and moystynge, of both equally by
meates, and drynkes, and medycynes convenient, by exercise, and gladness.

Now that he may keep his body it such temperancy, that he may live with out
ye horrible danger of grievous syckenes, and the better able to serve almighty
God, to whom be all honour.

FINIS.
Imprinted by me Robert wire / dwelling in saint Martyns parish / at the
sign of saint Iohn Euangelyst / beside Charynge Cross.

printer's or publisher's device


