THE REFORMED LIBRARIE-KEEPER With a Supplement to the Reformed-School, As
subordinate to Colleges in Universities.

BY JOHN DURIE.

Whereunto is added I. An Idea of Mathematics. II. The description of one of
the chiefest Libraries which is in Germanie, erected and ordered by one of the
most Learned Princes in Europe.


LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, and are to be sold by Rob. Littleberrie
at the sign of the Unicorn in Little Britain. 1650.

To the Reader.
Learned Reader!
THese Tracts are the fruits of some of my Solicitations and Negotiations for
the advancement of Learning. And I hope they may in time become somewhat
effectual to raise thy Spirit to the expectation of greater things, which may
be raised upon such grounds as these. All which are but preparatives towards
that perfection which we may expect by the advancement of the Kingdom of
Christ, wherein the Communion of Saints, by the graces of the Spirit, will
swallow up all these poor Rudiments of knowledge, which we now grope after by
so many helps; and till then in those endeavours I rest in the Truth*

Thy faithful and unwearied servant SAMUEL HARTLIE.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Reformed School.
Loving friend!
YOu have offered to me that which I confess I did not reflect upon, when I
wrote the discourse you have Published under the name of a Reformed School;
which is, that some may think by the way of Education, which I propose all
Universities and eminent places of Learning might subtly be undermined and
made useless, because therein a way is showed how to initiate youths not only
to the Principles of all Religious and Rational knowledge, and in the Exercises
of all Moral virtues, but in the grounds of all Civil emploiments, so far, as
will make them fit for all profitable undertakings in humane societies, whence
this will follow (in their apprehensions) that they shall have no advantage by
being sent to any Universities, to attein any further perfection: because the
Universities will not be able to add any thing unto them, which by their own
Industry, they may not afterward attein any where else, as well as there.
Truly it never came into my thoughts, either directly or indirectly to make
Universities useless; nor can it be rationally inferred from any thing in the
matter form or end of that discourse of mine: but I will grant that such as can
see no further then what we now ordinarily attein unto; and withal think that
there is no Plus ultra in nature atteinable above that which they have
conceived, such as I say may frame to themselv's this jealousy against that
discourse: but if they would raise their thoughts with me a little above the
ordinary pitch, and consider what the Nature of man is capable off: and how
far it may, by diligent instruction, by Method and Communication, be improved:
they might rather be induced to make this inference, if the natural abilities
of youths in a School (when reformed) may be thus far improved: how far more
may they be improved, when they are past the age of Youth, and com to Manhood
in Colleges and Universities, if namely Colleges and Universities, could in the
sphere of their activities be proportionally Reformed, as the Schools may be
in their sphere: for it is rational to conclude thus: if the first step of our
Reformation will lead us thus far, how far will the second and third lead us?
and if Scholastical Exercises in Youths of eighteen or twenty years, will
advance them to that perfection of Learning and Virtues, which few of double
their age or none almost ever attein unto, what will Collegial and Academical
Exercises (if reformed and set upon their proper Objects) bring them unto? I
shall therefore to eas you, or such as may have this scruple and jealousy over
me, declare that my purpose is so far from making Colleges and Universities
useless, that if I might have my desire in them, they should become a thousand
times more useful then now they are, that is, as far above the ordinary State
wherein they are set, as this School is above the ordinary way of Schooling:
for if we look upon the true and proper ends of School, College and
Universitie-studies and Exercises; we shall see that as in nature they are in
a gradual proportion, distant from, and subordinate unto each other, so they
ought to rise one out of another, and be built upon each other's Foundations.

The true and proper end of Schooling is to teach and Exercise Children and
Youths in the Grounds of all Learning and Virtues, so far as either their
capacity in that age will suffer them to com, or is requisite to apprehend the
principles of useful matters, by which they may be made able to exercise
themselves in every good Employment afterwards by themselves, and as the Proverb
is, sine Cortice natare. The true and proper end of Colleges should be to
bring together into one Society such as are able thus to Exercise themselves in
any or all kind of Studies, that by their mutual Association, Communication,
and Assistance in Reading, Meditating and conferring about profitable matters,
they may not only perfect their own Abilities, but advance the superstructures
of all Learning to that perfection, which by such means is attainable. And the
true and proper End of Universities, should be to publish unto the World the
Matters, which formerly have not been published; to discover the Errors and
hurtfulness of things mistaken for Truths; and to supply the defects and
desiderata, which may be serviceable to all sorts of Professions.

Now according to those aims and ends, I suppose it may be inferred, that
none should be dismissed out of the Schools, till they are able to make use of
all sorts of Books, and direct themselves profitably in every course of Study
or Action, whereunto their Genius shall lead them; and that none should be
admitted into any Colleges, but such as will join with others, to elaborate
some profitable Tasks, for the Advancement and facilitating of superstructures
in things already by some discovered, but not made common unto all; And that
none should be made Public Professors in Universities, but such as have not
only a Public aim, but some approved Abilities, to supply some defects and to
Elaborate some desiderata of useful knowledge, or to direct such as are
studious, how to order their thoughts in all Matters of search and Meditation,
for the discovery of things not hitherto found out by others; but which in
probability may be found out by rational searching.

Thus then I conceive, that in a well-Reformed Common wealth, which is to be
subordinate unto the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, wherein the Glory of God, the
happiness of the nature of man: and the Glorious liberty of the Sons of God is
to be revealed; all the subjects thereof should in their Youth be trained up
in some Schools fit for their capacities, and that over these Schools, some
Overseers should be appointed to look to the course of their Education, to see
that none should be left destitute of some benefit of virtuous breeding,
according to the several kinds of emploiments, whereunto they may be found
most fit and inclinable, whether it be to bear some civil Office in the
Common-wealth, or to be Mechanically employed, or to be bred to teach others
humane Sciences, or to be employed in Prophetical Exercises. As for this
School, which at this time I have delineated, it is proper to such of the
Nobility, Gentry and better sort of Citizens, which are fit to be made
capable to bear Offices in the Common-wealth: the other Schools may be spoken
off in due time, so far as they are distinct from this; but that which now I
have to suggest is chiefly this, that as out of the Schools the chois, which
ought to be made for Colleges, ought, Caeteris paribus, only to be of such
as are most fit to Advance the Ends of a Collegial Association; so out of
Colleges a chois ought to be made of Professors for the Universitie only, of
such as are fittest to advance the Ends of Public teaching in Universities,
which are not to Repeat and Compendiate that which others have published
twenty times already, over and over again, but to add unto the Common stock of
humane knowledge, that which others have not observed, to the end that all these
degrees of Studies and Exercises of the mind of man, being subordinate unto
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the happiness of Man by all Rational and Spiritual
ways of improving humane Abilities, may be advanced unto it's perfection in
this life so far as may be.

But how far short we com now of all these designs, I need not to relate unto
you: the Colleges as they are now Constituted, can scarce reach to the half of
that which the Schools might bring us unto: and the Professors of the
Universities com not up to that, which the Collegial Associations might
elaborate, if they were rightly directed to set their Talents a work; and if
the public Spirit of Christian love and ingenuity did posses those, that are
possessed of public places in the Colleges of the Universities. For if this
Spirit did rule their Aims and Endevors, there would be no self-seeking, no
partiality, no envy, nor any cross actings for private ends, to the
prejudice of the Public; but the generous love of virtue and of profitable
Learning, would sway all their inclinations to a free conjunction; and make
all their endeavours subordinate unto the public good of the Common-wealth of
Israel in the Communion of Saints. But how far this Principle of acting is now
wanting amongst us all, I shall not need to mention: you have considered it
long ago, and we have together lamented that defect, and the doleful effects
thereof: our endevor must be to seek out the best means of a Reformation
therein, and to make use of them as God shall give us opportunities. And truly
something of this kind might be don, without any great alteration or stir,
even as matters now are formed in the Colleges; if God would be so gracious to
us, as to beget in the minds of those that understand those things, a hearty
Aim and Resolution to benefit the Christian Common-wealth of Learning, by their
Collegial Relations and Associations one to another. For if men that are in
genuous will call to mind the end first, for which God doth give them all
their Talents, and then also for which men of public Spirits have erected
Colleges and Universities, and endowed the same with long and competent
maintenances; that such as are fit for Studies, and called to be Instrumental
in the propagation of Truth and Virtue, might not be distracted with the care
of the World, in reference to outward matters, but might have all the
conveniences which are imaginable to improve those Talents to the utmost,
either singly or conveniently with others, if (I say) ingenuous Christians
would mind these ends, for which the benefit of their Talents from God and of
their accommodations from men to improve those Talents are bestowed upon them:
it would not be possible for them; to be so unthankful towards God, and avers
from the rule of Christianity, and from the love of doing good to the
generation wherein they live; that they should intend to lead a Collegial life
only for their own private eas and convenience in outward things; that being
accommodated with all necessary helps of the Body, they may pleas themselves
only in the course of their Studies, with that Reservation and Retiredness,
which is proper to a Monkish life in Popish Cloisters; wherein the Spirit of
Mutual envy, of detraction and division is more irreconcilably entertained,
then in any other Societies of the World. For their Cloister-constitutions,
obliging them only to the observation of some formal works as an opus operatum;
for which their maintenance is allowed them; they not knowing any further
design of their life, or any greater happiness in this World, then to pleas
themselves; bestow all the rest of their time and thoughts, as their natural
inclinations lead them, which is commonly to nothing else but to self-love and
Pride, which became a Provocation unto others, to discover mutually their
corruptions, which by reaction make them all full of envy, of hatred, of evil
surmises, and of malicious practices one against another: so that no where
Satan doth dwell and rule more effectually, then in those Religious Houses, as
they are falsely so called. How much of this Monkish disposition doth remain as
yet in the formal Constitutions of Colleges, or in the Spirits of those that
partake of Collegial accommodations, is not a thing which I shall take upon me
to Judge; but I shall leav it to God, and to his day to discover; only I would
be glad that all such as are true Israelites, and know the end of their
calling unto Christ, and are not willing to bury their Talents, or to make
them useless unto others, for whose sakes they have received them would lay
this matter to heart, that their Aim in a Collegial life, should not be to
enjoie an easy careless way of subsistence by and for themselves, to follow
private fancies in their Studies about matters of Learning; but that they
should mind the stewardship of their gifts and places, and the advantages of
their Association, whereby they might be, (if they would make use of it) able
to elaborate some tasks, which otherwise cannot be brought to any perfection,
for the building up of the City of God in our generations. There is no want of
parts and abilities in the Spirits of our men, but the way to order them for
public Use, and to bring them together as stones fitly compacted to make up a
perfect Palace, is that which make's us all useless one to another; we find
that now and then, as it were by chance, some exquisite pieces of Learning,
which some have been hatching all their life time drop out; wherein appear's,
besides the usefulness of the Subject, or the uselessness thereof, some
inclination to be found extraordinary; but these endevors, disjointed from
public Aims, advance little or nothing, the Happiness, which true Learning
rightly ordered in all the parts thereof; and Subordinate unto Christianity,
is able to bring unto Mankind. Such pieces therefore serve only as a witness,
to show what wast there is of profitable time and abilities, for want of loving
combinations for public Designs. It is the observation of Foreigners
concerning our Universities, that they find in them men of as great learning
as any where else; but that they lie as it were dead and unknown to the whole
world of other men of Learning; because they delight to live a retired and
unsociable life: this humour therefore amongst other parts of our Reformation,
must by some Gospel-principles and Rational inducements be Reformed, not only
in Colleges but in other Associations. The Lord teach us the way of Truth and
Righteousness, that we may profit in all things to advance the glory of his
name in the Kingdom of his Son, in whom I rest

Your friend and servant. J. D.

THE REFORMED LIBRARIE-KEEPER.

BY JOHN DURIE.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO



LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, Anno Doom. 1650.

THE Reformed Librarie-Keeper: OR Two copies of Letters concerning the Place
and Office of a Librarie-Keeper.
The first Letter.
THe Librarie-Keeper's place and Office, in most Countries (as most other
Places and Offices both in Churches and Universities) are looked upon, as Places
of profit and gain, and so accordingly sought after and valued in that regard;
and not in regard of the service, which is to be don by them unto the
Common-wealth of Israel, for the advancement of Piety and Learning; for the
most part, men look after the maintenance, and livelihood settled upon their
Places, more then upon the end and usefulness of their emploiments; they seek
themselves and not the Public therein, and so they subordinate all the
advantages of their places, to purchase mainly two things thereby viz. an easy
subsistence; and some credit incomparison of others; nor is the last much
regarded, if the first may be had; except i^ be in cases of strife and
debate, wherein men are over-heated: for then indeed some will stand upon the
point of Honour, to the hazard of their temporal profits: but to speak in
particular of Librarie-Keepers, in most Universities that I know; nay indeed in
all, their places are but Mercenary, and their employment of little or no use
further, then to look to the Books committed to their custody, that they may
not be lost; or embezeled by those that use them: and this is all.

I have been informed, that in Oxford (where the most famous Library now
exstant amongst the Protestant-Christians is kept,) the settled maintenance of
the Librarie-keeper is not above fifty or sixty pound per annum; but that it
is accidentally, viis modis sometimes worth an hundred pound: what the accidents
are, and the ways by which they com, I have not been curious to search after;
but I have thought, that if the proper emploiments of Librarie-keepers were
taken into consideration as they are, or may be made useful to the advancement
of Learning; and were ordered and maintained proportionally to the ends, which
ought to be intended thereby; they would be of exceeding great use to all
sorts of Scholars, and have an universal influence upon all the parts of
Learning, to produce and propagate the same unto perfection. For if
Librarie-keepers did understand themselves in the nature of their work, and
would make themselves, as they ought to be, useful in their places in a public
way; they ought to become Agents for the advancement of universal Learning: and
to this effect I could wish, that their places might not be made, as every
where they are, Mercenary, but rather Honorarie; and that with the competent
allowance of two hundred pounds a year; some emploiments should be put upon
them further then a bare keeping of the Books. It is true that a fair Library,
is not only an ornament and credit to the place where it is; but an useful
commodity by it self to the public; yet in effect it is no more then a dead
Body as now it is constituted, in comparison of what it might be, if it
were animated with a public Spirit to keep and use it, and ordered as it
might be for public service. For if such an allovvance were settled upon the
employment as might maintain a man of parts and generous thoughts, then a
condition might be annexed to the bestowing of the Place* that none should be
called thereunto but such as had approved themselves zealous and profitable in
some public ways of Learning to advance the same, or that should be bound to
certain tasks to be prosecuted towards that end, whereof a List might be
made, and the way to try their Abilities in prosecuting the same should be
described, least in after times, unprofitable men creep into the place, to
frustrate the public of the benefit intended by the Doners towards posterity.
The proper charge then of the Honorarie Librarie-Keeper in an Universitie
should be thought upon, and the end of that Employment, in my conception, is
to keep the public stock of Learning, which is in Books and Manuscripts to
increase it, and to propose it to others in the way which may be most useful
unto all; his work then is to be a Factor and Trader for helps to Learning,
and a Treasurer to keep them, and a dispenser to apply them to use, or to see
them well used, or at least not abused; And to do all this, First a Catalogue,
of the Treasury committed unto his charge is to be made, that is all the
Books and Manuscripts, according to the Titles whereunto they belong, are to
be ranked in an order most easy and obvious to be found, which I think is
that of Sciences and Languages; when first all the Books are divided into their
subjectam materiam whereof they Treat, and then every kind of matter
subdivided into their several Languages: And as the Catalogue should be so
made, that it may always be augmented as the stock doth increase; so the place
in the Library must be left open for the increase of the number of Books in
their proper Seats, and in the Printed Catalogue, a Reference is to be made to
the place where the Books are to be found in their Shelves or repositories.
When the stock is thus known and fitted to be exposed to the view of the
Learned World, Then the way of Trading with it, both at home and abroad, is to
be laid to heart both for the increase of the stock, and for the improvement of
it to use. For the increase of the stock both at home and abroad,
correspondency should be held with those that are eminent in every Science,
to Trade with them for their profit, that what they want and we have, they may
receive upon condition, that what they have and we want, they should impart in
that faculty wherein their eminency doth lie; As for such as are at home
eminent in any kind, because they may com by Native right to have use of the
Librarie-Treasure, they are to be Traded withal in another vvaie, viz. that
the things which are gained from abroad, which as yet are not made common,
and put to public use should be promised and imparted to them for the increase
of their private stock of knowledge, to the end that what they have peculiar,
may also be given in for a requital, so that the particularities of gifts at
home and abroad, are to meet as in a Center in the hand of the Librarie-keeper,
and he is to Trade with the one by the other, to cause them to multiply the
public stock, whereof he is a Treasurer and Factor.

Thus he should Trade with those that are at home and abroad out of the
Universitie, and with those that are within the Universitie, he should have
acquaintance to know all that are of any parts, and how their vein of Learning
doth lie, to supply helps unto them in their faculties from without and from
within the Nation, to put them upon the keeping of correspondency with men of
their own strain, for the beating out of matters not yet elaborated in
Sciences; so that they may be as his Assistants and subordinate Factors in his
Trade and in their own for gaining of knowledge: Now because in all public
Agencies, it is fit that some inspection should be had over those that are
entrusted therewith, therefore in this Factorie and Trade for the increase of
Learning, some tie should be upon those Librarie-keepers to oblige them to
carefulness.

I would then upon this account, have an Order made that once in the year, the
Librarie-keeper should be bound to give an account of his Trading, and of his
Profit in his Trade (as in all humane Trades Factors ought, and use to do to
their principals at least once a year) and to this effect I would have it
ordered, that the chief Doctors of each faculty of the Universitie, should
meet at a Convenient time in a week of the year, to receive the Accounts of his
Trading, that he may show them wherein the stock of Learning hath been
increased, for that year's space; and then he is to produce the particulars
which he hath gained from abroad, and lay them before them all, that every
one in his own faculty m^ declare in the presence of others, that which he
thinks fit to be added to the public stock, and made common by the
Catalogue of Additionals, which every year within the Universities is to be
published in writing within the Library it self, and every three years (or
sooner as the number of Additionals may be great, or later, if it be small) to
be put in Print and made common to those that are abroad. And at this giving
up of the accounts, as the Doctors are to declare what they think worthy to
be added to the common stock of Learning, each in their Faculty; so I would
have them see what the Charges and Pains are whereat the Librarie-Keeper hath
been, that for his encouragement, the extraordinary expenses in
correspondences and transcriptions for the public good, may be allowed him
out of some Revenues, which should be set a part to that effect, and disposed
of according to their joint-consent and judgment in that matter. Here then he
should be bound to show them the Lists of his correspondents, the Letters from
them in Answer to his, and the reckoning of his extraordinary expense should
be allowed him in that which he is indebted, or hath freely laid out to
procure Rarities into the stock of Learning. And because I understand that all
the Book-Printers or Stationars of the Common-wealth are bound of every Book
which is Printed, to send a Copy into the Universitie Library; and it is
impossible for one man to read all the Books in all Faculties, to judge of them
what worth there is in them; nor hath every one Ability to judge of all kind
of Sciences what every Author doth handle, and how sufficiently; therefore I
would have at this time of giving accounts, the Librarie-keeper also bound to
produce the Catalogue of all the Books sent unto the Universitie's Library by
the Stationars that Printed them; to the end that every one of the Doctors in
their own Faculties should declare, whether or no they should be added, and
where they should be placed in the Catalogue of Additionals; For I do not
think that all Books and Treaties which in this age are Printed in all kinds,
should be inserted into the Catalogue, and added to the stock of the Library,
discretion must be used and confusion avoided, and a course taken to
distinguish that which is profitable, from that which is useless; and according
to the verdict of that Society, the usefulness of Books for the public is to
be determined; yet because there is seldom any Books wherein there is not
something useful, and Books freely given are not to be cast away, but may be
kept, therefore I would have a peculiar place appointed for such Books as shall
be laid aside to keep them in, and a Catalogue of their Titles made
Alphabetically in reference to the Autor's name, with a note of distinction to
show the Science to which they are to be referred. These thoughts com thus
suddenly into my head, which in due time may be more fully described, if need
be, chiefly if, upon the ground of this account, some competencie should be
found out and allowed to maintain such charges as will be requisite, towards
the advancement of the Public good of Learning after this manner.

The second Letter.
Sir!
IN my last I gave you some incident thoughts, concerning the improvement of an
Honorarie Librarie-keeper's-place, to show the true end and use thereof, and
how the keepers thereof should be regulated in the Trade, which he is to
drive for the Advancement of Learning, and encouraged by a competent
maintenance, and supported in extraordinary expenses for the same. Now I wish
that some men of public Spirits and lovers of Learning, might be made
acquainted with the Action, upon such grounds as were then briefly suggested;
who know's but that in time something might be offered to the Trustees of the
Nation, with better conceptions then these I have suggested.

For, if it be considered that amongst many Eminencies of this Nation, the
Library of Oxford is one of the most considerable for the advancement of
Learning, if rightly improved and Traded withal for the good of Scholars at
home and abroad; If this (I say) be rightly considered and represented to the
public Reformers of this age, that by this means this Nation as in other
things, so especially for Piety and Learning, and by the advancement of both,
may now be made more glorious then any other in the world; No doubt such as
in the Parliament know the worth of Learning will not be avers from further
overtures, which may be made towards this purpose. What a great stir hath been
heretofore, about the Eminency of the Library of Heidelberg, but what use was
made of it? It was engrossed into the hands of a few, till it became a Prey
unto the Enemies of the Truth. If the Librarie-keeper had been a man, that
would have traded with it for the increase of true Learning, it might have been
preserved unto this day in all the rarities thereof, not so much by the
shuttings up of the multitude of Books, and the rareness thereof for
antiquity, as by the understandings of men and their proficiency to improv
and dilate knowledge upon the grounds which he might have suggested unto others
of parts, and so the Librarie-rarities would not only have been preserved in
the spirits of men, but have fructified abundantly therein unto this day,
whereas they are now lost, because they were but a Talent dug in the ground;
And as they that had the keeping of that Library made it an Idol, to be
respected and worshipped for a rarity by an implicit faith, without any
benefit to those who did esteem of it a far off: so it was just with God that
it should fall into the hands of those that in all things follow an Idolatrous
way, to blind men with shows without all reality of substantial virtue,
which is only eminent in this, that it becomes profitable unto all, by
dilating the light of knowledge, and the love of grace and goodness in the
hearts of all men, that are fit to receive the one and the other; And where this
Aim is not in those that are entrusted with public places; there they in the
end will be found unprofitable servants; for the trust which God hath put into
their hands to profit withal, they discharge not for the account which every
one is to give unto him of his Stewardship, is not how careful he hath kept
things of use unto himself, to pride himself in the possession of that which
others have not, (as the custom of men is, that know not what true glory is)
but how faithfully and diligently he hath distributed the same to such as were
worthy thereof for their good, that they might be stirred up both to glorify
God for his goodness; and to imitate him in the Communication of all good
things unto others for his sake freely. This was Christ's Work on Earth to
receive us, unto the Glory of God; this was that which he taught by this
practice, that it is more blessed to give, then to receive. This is that which
this envious World cannot relish, and what stop's the current of true love in
the hearts of men? Nothing so much as the self-seeking of men in the vvaies of
Learning, by which they covetously obstruct the fountains of life and comfort,
which might overflow and water abundantly the barren and thirsty Souls of
those that perish for want of address nnto wisdom; which in all the vvaies
of humane and divine Learning might be mainly advanced, by the industry of
one man in such a place, whose Trade should be such as I formerly described,
to deal with the spirits of all men of parts, to set them a working one by
and towards another, upon the subjects which he should be entrusted withal
to keep in the stock of Learning. It is the Glory and Riches of Nations and of
great Cities, to make themselves the Center of Trade for all their Neighbours;
and if they can find vvaies of polity, to oblige their Neighbours to receive
from their Magazines the Commodities whereof they stand in need, it is every
vvaie a great benefit unto the State, so it may be in matters of Learning, and
by the Trade of Sciences this Church may oblige all the Neighbor Churches, and
that Universitie all Foreigners that Trade in knowledge to receive precious
Commodities, whereof they stand in need, from our Magazines and Storehouses; if
a painful Steward and dispenser thereof, be employed and maintained to use
industry for so blessed a work, from whence much Glory to God in the Gospel,
and honour will redound to the Nation. For although the ways of humane Learning
are almost infinite and wonderfully various, and have their peculiar uses in
the outward life of man, for which most men affect them, yet in one that is to
mind the universal good of all, the whole variety and diversity of matters
useful unto this present life, as they com within the sphere of Learning must
be reduced, and may be subordinate unto the advancement of the Gospel of
Christ, wherein the Glory of the Nation, at this and all times should be
thought to stand: And truly that is the thing which take's most with me, for
which I would have that Library thus improved by a faithful keeper, that when
his Trade is set on foot, with all those that are of eminent parts in their
several faculties, we knowing who they are and wherein their eminencies do
lie, may have opportunities to provoke them to the right use thereof, by giving
them Objects from our store; and furnishing them with tasks and matters to be
elaborated, which cannot be diverted from the scope of God's glory to be
made known unto all men in Jesus Christ, for there is nothing of knowledge in
the mind of man, which may not be conveniently referred to the virtues of God
in Christ, whereby the humane nature is to be exalted to that dignity
whereunto he hath received it, that it should by him rule over the whole
Creation. And the want of this Aim to look upon things in order to him, and to
set them a working without relation to him, is that which blast's all our
endevors, and make's them determine in confusion and disorder; For whatsoever is
not directed in it's own place with some reference unto him must be overthrown;
nor is there any way left for any to prosper in that which he undertaketh,
but to learn to know him and respect him in it, for the advancement of the
Kingdom over the Souls of men, which by the Sanctified use of all knowledge is
chiefly effected. If then the Trade of Learning is to be set a foot in a
public way, and regulated to deserve the countenance of a Religious State,
this Aim, and the way of prosecuting of it must be intended and beaten out;
For except Sciences be reformed in order to this Scope, the increase of
knowledge will increase nothing but strife, pride and confusion, from whence our
sorrows will be multiplied and propagated unto posterity; but if he, who is
to be entrusted with the managing of this Trade, be addressed in the way
which leads unto this Aim without partiality, his negotiation will be a
blessing unto this age and to posterity.

I have no time to enlarge upon this Subject, or to conceive a formal and
regular discourse, but the thoughts which thus fall into my mind I impart unto
you, that you may give them as hints unto others, who of themselves will be
able to enlarge them either to the House, or to such as can in due time sway
the Counsels of leading men in this Common-wealth.

AN Idea of Mathematics written by Mr Joh. Pell to Samuel Hartlib.
Sir!
THe sum of what I have heretofore written or spoken to you, concerning the
advancement of the Mathematics, is this: As long as men want will, wit, means
or leisure to attend those studies, it is no marvel if they make no great
progress in them. To remedy which, I conceive these means not to be amiss.

1. To write a Consiliarius Mathematicus, (so I call it) answering to these 3
questions: Q. 1. What fruit or profit arises from the study of Mathematics?
Q. 2. What helps are there for the attaining this profitable knowledge? Q. 3*
What order is to be observed in using these helps?

To this purpose it should contain 1. A plain and popular discourse of the
extent of the Mathematics, with the profit that redound's, first to the Student
himself, and then to the Country wherein there are many such grounded
Artists. 2. A Catalogue of Mathematicians and their works in this order: 1. A
Synopsis of all the several kinds of Mathematical writings, either extant in
print, or accessible Manuscripts in public Libraries, with several numbers set
to every kind. 2. A Chronical Catalogue of all Mathematician's names that
ever were of note, according to the order of the years when they lived, with
the year when any of their works were first printed, 3. A Catalogue of the
writings themselves, in the order of years in which they were printed in any
language: And this I would contrive thus: First, the year of our Lord, and
then the names of all the Mathematical Books Printed that year in any Country
or Language, after the usual manner of Catalogues: but 1. Adding the volume,
that is, not only what fold [40. 80. c.] but also the number of leaves, that
we may estimate the bulk of the Book. 2. Prefixing before the title the year
to which you must look back to know either when it was written, or when it
was last before Printed, in that or any other Language. 3. Setting in the
margent, after the Title. 1. The year wherein it was the next time Printed.
2. The number of reference to the Synopsis in the first page; By which numbers
one may presently run over all the Books of one sort, of this or that
particular subject.


3. A Counsel directing a student to the best Books in every kind; In what
order, and how to read them, What to observe, what to beware of in some
Mathematicasters, how to proceed and keep all. 4. A Paraenesis, First, To all
those who have means and leisure, and a wit not unapt for these studies, to set
upon them in regard 1. of their profitableness to the student, and to mankind.
2. of that more refined pleasure of hunting out hidden truths, vvrastling with
difficult Problems, and getting the victory; and so much the rather, because
3. of the great facility that is now in that study, by reason of the many
helps to spare much labour, time and cost, which our forefathers were forced
to spend. Secondly, To all those who have understanding to estimate the worth
of these studies, and wealth vvherewith to purchase themselves lasting honour by
the wise dispensing of it, to take more notice of this sort of students, and
to encourage them, setting apart the choicest of them, to perfect the
inventions, to which their Genius lead's them. Especially, To all Princes and
Estates, whom it concern's to take a course, 1. that their dominions may be
better furnished with this sort of students. 2. That the vvaie may be made
less laborious and costly, 3. That Mathematica ingenia may be discovered and
assisted.


To which end it would be good. 2. to erect a Public Library, containing
all those Books, and one instrument of every sort that hath been invented,
with sufficient revenue, 1. To buy one copy of all those that shall be
Printed yearly in other Countries. and 2. To maintain a Librarie-keeper of
great judgment, to whom it may belong 1. To peruse all Books of such subjects,
to be Printed within that Country, and 1. Suppress vvhatsoever is not
according to Art, that Learners be not abused, and 2. Admonish the Writers, if
they bring nothing but stale stuff. 2. Upon his credit to approv excellent
inventions, and unpartially to commend the inventors to the rewarders. 3. To
receive, record and place one Printed copy of every Book so perused, sent into
the Library, well bound at the Autor's or Book-seller's charge. 4. To resolv
any student that enquire's about any Problem, whether it have been don
already or no, fearing lest he should actum agere, and therefore perhaps
suppressing some invention which he hath light upon, but doubts it is old and
to be found in some of the Books of that Library. 5. To receive,
c. all such Manuscripts as shall be brought thither by vvaie of gift, Legacy
or the like. 6. To maintain correspondence with such as himself in other
Countries, to know what is Printed there. 7. To take notice of all his
Countrymen that are fit to be Teachers, c. 8. To keep a Catalogue of all such
vvorkmen as are able and fit to be employed in making Mathematical Instruments
and representations, working upon Wood, Magnets, Metals, Glass, c. 9. To give
testimonial, after examination, to all sorts of practisers, as Pilots, Masters,
Landmeters, Accountants, c. of their speculative ability and practical
dexterity, that those that have occasion to use such men, be not abused by
unable undertakers, to their exceeding great damage. By the Catalogue, men
might be informed, in that multitude of Books, with which the world is now
pestered, what the names are of those Books that tend to this study only. In
the Library, they might find the Books themselves, read them, and if they
liked them, know whither to send to buy them: Besides, any, whether
foreigners or others, might have recourse thither, and learn what helps that
Country would afford them in these studies. And this is the best course that I
can think on for the making use of such helps as we have already. If men
desire better helps, let them employ fit Artists.


3. To write and publish these three new Treatises: 3
1. Pandectae Mathematicae, Comprehending as Clearly, Orderly, and Thrftily,
and Ingenuously as may be, vvhatsoever may be gathered out of all those
Mathematical Books and Inventions that were before us, or that may be
inferred as Consectaries thereon; citing, at the end of every period or
Proposition, the ancientest Author in which it is found, and branding all later
writers if they be taken stealing, or borrovving without acknovvledgment, or
[which is vvors] expressly arrogating to themselves any other man's inventions.
This would bring that great Library into far less room, to the saving of more
labour, time and cost, to all after-students, than men can yet well imagine.
But because this also would be too great and cumbersome to carry about us, Let
there be composed 2. Comes Mathematicus, 4
Comprehending in a pocket-Book, [and therefore as briefly as may be] the
usefullest Tables and the Precepts for their use, in solving all Problems,
whether purely Mathematical, or applied to such practices as men's various
occasions may require. And lastly, that in this kind of Learning also, vvee
be no longer tied to Books, Let there be composed 3. Mathematicus (...), 5
or An instruction, showing how any Mathematician that will take the pains,
may prepare himself, so, as that he may, though he be utterly destitute of
Books or Instruments, resolv any Mathematical Problem as exactly as if he
had a complete Library by him.



And this is the Idea, which I have long framed to my self, according to my
fashion, with whom this passes for an undoubted truth, that the surest vvaie
to com to all possible excellency in any thing, is to propose to our selves
the perfectest Idea's that vvee can imagine, then to seek the means tending
thereto, as rationally as may be, and to prosecute it with indefatigable
diligence; yet, if the Idea prove too high for us, to rest our selves content
with approximation.

As for this present Idea, I am so far from counting it meerly-impossible, that
I see not why it might not be performed by one man, without any assistants,
provided that he were neither distracted with cares for his maintenance, nor
diverted by other emploiments.

The excellency of this work, make's me wish mine own Nation the honour of
first undertaking and perfecting this design, And I conceive I have some reason
to hope that it will be so. For, though I know few or none that are both
able and willing to promote designs of this nature, yet can I not therefore
be persvvaded that this Kingdom is so destitute of learned Nobility and
Gentry, that there can be found none to countenance and advance this part of
Learning, even in this vvaie, if they could see it possible and likely to be
effected.

As for the Library and Catalogue, 1.2
there can be no doubt but they may easily be had, if Money be not wanting.
Nor is it unlikelie that divers of this Nation (if they be set apart for it)
are able to compose the other 3. new Treatises; For though I know no such, yet
I persuade my self there may be found amongst us men able to encounter all
the difficulties, and to endure all the labour, that they must needs meet with
in the raising of so great a Fabric. And I the rather believe that there are
many such, because for mine own part, notwithstanding the want of Counsel and
helps in that study, and the innumerable diversions and distractions that I
have had, I am nevertheless com to such a confidence of my understanding the
depth of that study, that, were I to pen those Pandects, 3.
I should lay heavier Lavvs upon my self, than I have already mentioned;
namely, First to lay down such an exact Method or description of the process
of Man's reason in inventions, that afterward it should be imputed merely to
my negligence and disobedience to my own Lavvs, [and not to their
insufficiency] if, from my first grounds, seeds, or principles, I did not, in
an orderly vvaie, according to that prescribed Method, deduce, not only all
that ever is to be found in our Antecessor's writings, and vvhatsoever they
may seem to have thought on, but also all the Mathematical inventions,
Theoremes, Problems and Precepts, that it is possible for the working vvits of
our successors to light upon, and that in one certain, unchanged order, from
the first seeds of Mathematics, to their highest and noblest applications, as
well as to the meanest and most ordinary. Not setting them down at random as
they com in my head, as those before us have don, so that they seem to have
light upon their Problems and the solutions of them by chance, not to have
found them by one perpetual, constant, invariable process of Art. Yet such an
Art may men invent, if they accustom themselves, as I have long don, to
consider, not only the usefulness of men's works, and the meaning and truth
of their writings, but also how it came to pass that they fell upon such
thoughts, and that they proposed to themselves such ends, or found out such
means for them.

Were these Pandects thus made and finished, I suppose it is manifest, that by
their orderly, rational and uniform compleatness, above all that hath been
hitherto written, they would spare after-students much labour and time that is
now spent in seeking out of Books, and disorderly reading them, and
struggling with their cloudy expressions, unapt representations, different
Methods, confusions, tautologies, impertinencies, falsehoods by paralogisms and
pseudographemes, uncertainties because of insufficient demonstrations, c.
besides much cost also, now throvvn avvaie upon the multitude of Books, the
greater part whereof they had perhaps been better never to have seen.

And it may be some would like the Method of that work so well, as to extend
it farther, and apply it to other studies; in speculation imitating this my
vvariness, that no falsehood be admitted, and no truth omitted; and for
practice enuring themselves, any subject being propounded, to determine the
number of all the Problems that can be conceived concerning it, and any
Problem being propounded, demonstratively to show either all the means of
it's solution, or the impossibility of it: and if so, then whether it be not
yet, or not at all possible.

Men would easily see how to contract these Pandects into a pocket-Book for
their ordinary use. 4.
But so to lay them up in their heads, 5.
as to need no Book at all [according to that desideratum of mine, to have a
Mathematicus (...)] will perhaps seem utterly impossible to most: No man, that
ever I heard of, having proposed such a scope to himself before. But perhaps
they will conceive it more possible, if it pleas them to suspend their
judgments, till they have considered what means may be used to fortify the
imagination, to prompt the memory, to regulate our reason, and what effects
may be produced by the uniting of these means, and the constant exercising of
them.

For mine own part, the consideration of the incomparable excellency,
unstained pleasure, vnvaluable profitableness, and undoubted possibility of
this whole design, hath prevailed so far with me, that, notwithstanding all
the discouragements that I have met withal, I have don more towards it than
bare Idea.

BIBLIOTHECA AUGUSTA, SERENISSIMI, ILLUSTRISSIMI PRINCIPIS, ac DOMINI, D.
AUGUSTI, Ducis Brunovicensis, Lunaeburgensis. Quae est WOLFERBYTI.
In Bibliothecam Augustam.
VIderat Augustam Dea Caesia Bibliothecam,
Augusti manibus Guelphica in Vrbe strui:
Nunc mihi tur^igeras quantumvis Ma^spiter arces
Objice, quas vehemens Occaracingit, ait.
Grandia si Libris praefers tormenta, memento*
Illa homines-miseros, hanc posuisse Deum.
M. Henricus Julius Scheurl, Moralium in Acad. Julia Professor publicus.

BIBLIOTHECA AUGUSTA, quae body Guelpherbiri, antiquissima Ducum
Brunovicensium Sede visitur, sive locum, sive armaria, sive ipsam denique
molem, congeriem Librorum, sub eo nomine intelligas, primum, unicum, Autorem
habet, Serenissimum Illustrissimum Principem, ac Dominum, Dominum AUGUSTUM,
Ducem Brunovicensem Lunaeburgensem, qui, ut a primis adolescentiae annis,
artium cultor solertissimus, ingeniorum censor acutissimus, ita etiam, quod
istis adhaeret, praestantissimorum in omni eruditionis genere Librorum
amantissimus.

Exemplum quidem, ardorem, Illustrissimus Princeps ad istos conatus, a Regibus
Imperatoribus, qui curam hanc vere Regiam sibi propriam esse voluerunt: Rem
vero nullam ab aliis habuit. Obversabatur nempe animo Osimanduas Aegypti Rex,
qui ut est apud Diodorum Siculum, lib. 1. cap. 49. sacrae Bibliothecae a se
erectae, titulum esse voluit: (...), MEDICATORIUM ANIMAE, ut vertit L.
Rhodomanus, ejusque ut in Regno, ita in laudabili instituto post aliquot secula
Successor Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, cujus Bibliotheca, exemplo, imo Libris summi
Aristotelis instructa, omnium Historicorum ore, laudibus celebris: Eumenes
item, seu Attalus, (utrique enim, huic patri, illi filio laudem hanc Historia
tribuit) Pergami Reges, quorum tantum in hoc negotio studium, ut cum Ptolomaeus
chartas seu papyrum, quam sola Aegyptus suppeditaverat, invide supprimeret,
veritus, no Attalus veterem illam Aegypti Bibliothecam nova sua aequaret; ille
ferro, quod la, viam sibi aperiendam, novamque Librorum conficiendorum
rationem inueniendam censeret, optimo sane successu: membranarum enim ex corio
animalium confectarum usum, ut Varro author est apud Plinium lib. 13. cap. 11.
invenit, cui omne quicquid ad Typographiae inventionem usque superat Librorum,
unice debemus. Unde merito factum est, ut in aeviternam inventoris Pergami
Regis memoriam, hujusmodi membranae adhuc body Pergamenae dicantur.

Nec defuit Principi domesticum Illustrissimorum Antecessorum lineae
Principalis Guelphicae, Arcis Guelpherbiti Possessorum, exemplum, qui ipsi
superiori seculo instructissimam Bibliothecam, copia tamen Librorum huic
Augustae non comparandam, paraverant, quam demum Anno aerae Dionysianae 1617.
ultimus istius Lineae FREDERICVS VLRICVS Academiae Juliae, quae est
Helmaestadii, possidendam, utendam liberaliter contulit. Res, ut patet,
augurio, omine felicissimo non carens. Ut enim Principi AUGUSTO possession,
avita Sedes Ducatus Guelphici, satis dudum destinata demonstraretur, idem
Genius, quem in postremis istius Ducatus Possessoribus HENRICO Bellicoso, seu
Juniore, JVLIO Pacifico, HENRICO JVLIO sapientissimo, FRIDERICO VLDARICO
mitissimo, universus Orbis admirabatur, in Principem AVGVSTVM eruditissimum,
transferendus erat, atque ut illustrior esset ejus sama, omne quicquid in re
Libraria Antecessorum diligentia praestiterat, ad Academiam Juliam transire,
omnis vero lans erectae Bibliothecae Augustae, soli unico Principi AVGVSTO
propria esse debebat.

Superasse autem non immerito dicendus est AUGUSTUS in hoc studio, opere, sive
Ptolomaeos, sive Attalos, sive JVLIVM, AVGVSTVM, primos Romanorum Imperatores,
(nec horum enim studium in negotio librario eruditis ignotum) quod Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus non proprio sive ingenio, sive industria, sed aliena, Demetrii
nempe Phalerei viri Atheniensis, scriptis, factis illustrissimi, rem
confecerit: Caesar vero curam hanc, quam magno animo conceperat, nisi fata
intercepissent, absolvisset, Marco Varroni, Graecorum Latinorumque doctissimo,
quo nullus ea tempestate in orb terrarum isti negotio aptior, dederit.
AVGVSTVS quoque Imperator, nec ipse quidem, sed per Asinium Pollionem
(Oratorem, Senatorem Romanum nobilem) absolvit.

Princeps vero AUGUSTUS, primus author pulcerrimi sui Operis, sibimetipsi
Demetrius, Varro, Pollio, cujus solius vigiliis, curis nocturnis diurnisque
Bibliotheca AUGUSTA acquisita, composita est. Exemplo Pisistrati, Atheniensium,
ut tum vocabantur, Tyranni, qui Bibliothecam Atheniensem ad publicum usum, non
per alios, sed ipse componebat, cui Homerum digestum, correctumque debemus:
Magnus profecto vir, modo cognomen illud odiosum tollas.

Initium Bibliothecae Augustae colligendae factum est, Anno aerae Dionysianae
1604. ad confluentem Albis, Jetzae, in Principis AUGUSTI Ducatu Lunaeburgico,
in Aula, adjuncto cognomini oppido Hitzackera, loco quidem ante constitutam
ibidem Principis Aulam, satis obscuro, quem tamen non minus atque olim Ulysses
Ithacam suam satis illustrem reddidit. In hoc recessu satis amoeno, inter alia
Principis opera magnifica, parvis primum initiis crevit haec Bibliotheca, in
illam magnitudinem, quae body non sine admiratione cernitur.

Ex haereditate ulla nihil erat, quod in tantae molis auspicium, aut
fundamentum cederet, immensis autem sumptibus conquirebatur, quicquid optimae
notae Librorum, in quocunque genere eruditionis in Germania, Gallia, Hispania,
Anglia, Belgio, ipsa denique Italia inveniri poterat.

Quicquid erat doctorum virorum Romae, Neapoli, Venetiis, Florentiae (quibus in
locis Princeps AUGUSTUS per aliquod annos eruditissimorum virorum familiaritate
usus erat) Lutetiae, Londini, Oxoniae, ut de Germania nihil addatur, illorum
opera magnis sumptibus ad conquirendos optimae notae Libros conducebatur.

Incrementum operi coepto haud contemnendum dedit Bibliotheca summi viri, de
universa Germania optime meriti Marquardi Freheri, Caelii item Curionis,
ejusdemque filii Coelii Augustini Curionis, magno Reipubl. literariae damno, in
ipso aetatis flore ante parentem exstincti: Joachimi quo{que} Clutenii, cujus
variam eruditionem Sylloge ejus rerum quotidianarum satis demonstrat.

Crevit igitur in magnum, merito suo admirandum numerum, non quorumvis, sed
optimorum, selectorum Librorum, ut body, (21. nempe Maii, Anni 1649.)
numerentur (...), (ut la Plutarchus in M. Antonio) singulares Libri seu
Volumina, licet in uno Volumine plures saepe Libri, sive Tractatus,
inveniantur, ferme viginti millia.

Voluminum nempe,
Manuscriptorum 764 Theologicorum 7287 Juridicorum 2578 Physicorum, quae ad
primam Philosophiam pertinent 460 Medicorum. 580 Mathematicorum in genere, in
specie Geometricorum 168 Geographicorum 86 Astronomicorum 197 Musicorum 54
Arithmeticorum 52 Ethicorum 778 Politicorum 682 Historicorum 2133 Ad res
Bellicas pertinentium 142 Oeconemicorum 41 Logicorum 65 Rhetoricorum 401
Grammaticorum 407 Poeticorum 746 Variorum, seu ut vulgo vocantur
Quodlibeticorum, in quibus nempe, vel-diversi Tractatus, ad diversas
disciplinas pertinentes, conjuncti visuntur: vel tales Tractatus in iis
deprehenduntur, in quibus varia, modo ad has, modo ad alias disciplinas
pertinentia explicantur. 2092 Scriptores vero seu Autores, quorum monumenta in
praedictis Voluminibus exstant, numerantur 37077 Tractatus autem, sive
diversorum, sive eorundem Autorum, supra 60000.
Et no quis inmortalia ipsius Principis AUGUSTI monumenta hic desideret,
visuntur non tantum ibidem ea, quae ab aliena profecta industria, vitam ipsi
debent, veluti, (ut de multis pauci nominentur) Antonii Bonfin^i symp^sion
trimetron: Bartholomaei Fontii Commentarius in Persium, verum etiam praeclara
ejusmetipsius Scripta, eruditorum Orbi sub nomine GUSTAVI SELENI, olim
exhibita: CRYPTOGRAPHIA nempe, qua (teste Clarissimo Naudaeo in Bibliographia
Politica) eruditissimi Trithemii Steganographia hactenus omnibus serme
eruditis, ipsi etiam FRANCISCO JUNIO magica credita, hujusque judicio, Volcano
consecrata, ita illustrata est, ut quicquid in Trithemio obscurum involutumque
tamdiu in summa omnium veneratione, opinione delituerat, omnium oculis
patefactum, atque retectum sit. Videatur eruditissimus Gerhardus Joh. Vossius,
ipsius Clarissimi Francisci Junii gener, libro de art Grammatica primo, Cap.
41. Praeter Trithemii Steganographica in Opere hoc Cryptographico omnia ea
explicantur, clarissimae luci exponuntur, quae, in isto reconditae scientiae
profundae indaginis negotio, humani ingenii vis excogitare potuit.

LVSVS quoque SCHACHIAE una cum RYTHMOMACHIA seriae profundae eruditionis Opus.
Prodiit uterque Liber, iste quidem Lunaeburgi, hic vero Lipsiae in forma
majori, seu folio, ut la, elegantissimis typis excusus, imaginibus
exornatus.

HISTORIA item vitae (...) JESU CHRISTI, ex quatuor, ut vocantur,
Evangelistarum, reliquis novi Foederis libris, sermon Principis patrio
concinnata accurata pensitatione ita elaborata, ut quicquid hactenus
difficultatum, seu (...) omnium eruditorum ingenia mirifice exercuit, id
feliciter explicatum, sacrorum Scriptorum consensus, ut Augustinus loquitur,
clarissime demonstratus sit.

Manuscriptorum, ut vocantur, librorum haud contemnendus in hac Bibliotheca est
numerus, Thesaurus, quorum nonnullos ipse Princeps in Ungaria, occasion
itinerum ad D. D. Imperatores RVDOLPHUM II. FERDINANDVM II. in arduis negotiis
susceptorum, magno aere redemit, in tenuissima magni pretii membrana
elegantissimis litteris scriptos, laciniam illustrissimae Bbliothecae, Budae,
Regni Ungariae Metropoli quondam, a Matthia Hunniade Corvino, circa An. Christi
1485. erectae, Turcarum Tyranno Solimanno, cum Anno aere Dionys. 1541. fraud,
vi Budam caperet, viduamque Joannis Regis Hungariae Elisabetham, quam cum Regno
defendendam se venisse simulaverat, cum filiolo infant ejiceret, ereptae.

Bibliotheca haec Matthiae Hunniadis (verba sunt Antonii Bonfinii, rerum
Ungaricarum decade. 4. lib. 7. mira utriusque linguae foecunditate fuit
completa, cultus autem Librorum luxuriosissimus: cujus prosterioris testes
locupletissimi sunt hi Manuscripti, quorum occasion haec adducta sunt.

Nec desunt Instrumenta Mathematica exquisitissime fabrefacta, Sphaerae item
Globi, quibus Sphaerae coelestis sidera motus, facies item Globi terrestris
miro artificio accurate representantur.

Nequaquam vero numero isto, quem supra posuimus, clauditur haec Bibliotheca,
cum quotidie magnis sumptibus, indefesso studio accedat, conquiratur, quicquid
melioris notae Librorum sive noviter, sive denuo editum prodit, aut in omnibus
orbis partibus investigari, redimi potest, adeo{que} Bibliotheca haec AUGUSTA
no vanum sit nominis augurium, singulis diebus augetur.

Primordia, ut supra notatum, in tranquillo Principis AUGUSTI Hitzakerianae
^thacae Regno, satis quidem auspicato sumsi^, parum tamen aberat, quin Anno
Christi 1636. absent Principe, Aulam suam Brunsvicum, Urbem suam
haereditariam, transferente, rapaces manus (...) Bellonae Filii, a Principe
nunquam laesi, experta fuisset: qui licet spe animo eam plane devoraverat;
vigili tamen Principis cura itinere properatissimo, unguibus hujus Harpiyae
intercipiebatur. Fatum istud olim experta erat illustris Atheniensium
Bibliotheca, cum Xerxes Persarum Monarcha, devictis Atheniensibus, hostibus
suis, potissimam praedae partem eam faceret, transferret. Restituit tamen
eandem trecentos triginta post Annos Seleucus Nicanor Syriae Rex, qui eam
insigniter auctam, magnis item muneribus locupletatam, Athenas remittendam
curavit.

Postquam igitur dominium possession Ducatus Guelphici, Principi AUGUSTO
legitime delata erat, Arx vero Guelpherbytana, avita vera Ducum Brunsvicensium
Sedes, quae Seculi hujus est iniuria, legitimum suum dominum nondum admitteret,
transtulit Bibliothecam Princeps Brunsvicum, Ducatus Guelphici Metropolin,
avitum Ducum Brunsvicensium dominium, una cum Ducatu, jure haereditario sibi
delatum, eique locum concessit fatis magnificum, in antiquissima Majorum suorum
TANQVARDI BRVNONIS, fratrum, Ducum Saxoniae (cui posteriori, ortum, nomen
Brunsvicum debet) Sede, contigua Augustissimo St. Blasii Templo, condito olim
ab HENRICO LEON nemini Historicorum non celebrato, a quo Princeps AUGUSTUS
recta, quod la, linea, ortum ducit.

Optimo sane consilio, quod olim veteres Aegypti Reges Bibliothecas suas
Memphi, celeberrimae Aegypti Metropoli, in Templo Vulcani (cujus magnificentiam
apud Herodotum videre licet) habitare voluerint: Ptolomaei item tam prior, quam
posterior, a Cleopatra, Antonii Triumviri amoribus famosa, e ruderibus excitata
Bibliotheca, Alexandriae apud Serapidis, immensae molis stupendi artificii
Templum, totius Aegyptiacae superstitionis arcem, collocata fuerit, teste
Tertulliano, qui gentiles, ad inspiciendum textum Hebraeum S. Scripturae, eo
advocat amandat.

Accepta tandem XIV. Septembris, Anno 1643. Arce Urbe Wolferbyte, transiit
eodem una cum Principe, Bibliotheca haec Augusta, sedemque sortita est e
regione Aulae illustrissima adeoque reddita est pars Regiae, ut Principi semper
in propinquo promptu sint, immortales illae, eaedemque sanctissimae nunquam non
loquentes Animae, ut Plinius hujusmodi eruditorum monumenta site la lib.
35. Cap. 2. Locus, seu aedificium ubi reposita est; olim loricis, scutis,
hastis, aliisque Bellonae ornamentis instrumentis asservandis destinatus
fuerat, dignus omnino cui body aureis literis titulus fiat: -- Armamentaria
sacrae
Pallados, doctis habitata Palatia Musis.
Aditus ejus Augustissimus, solitam Principis Magnificentiam spirans, ipsum
tamen sacrarium modice ornatum, quin potius ad exemplum peritorum
Architectorum, neque aureo lacunari comptum, neque pavimentum, neque armaria,
seu pegmata, ut Cicero la, neque cunei, loculi aut plutei aliuni quam
viridem colorem referunt* Fulgorem enim, sive aureum, sive quemvis alium oculis
officere viridem e contra colorem reficiendis, recreandis esse oculis,
scriptioni, lectioni, dudum notatum est naturae Mystis.

Usum hujus Bibliothecae quod attinet, non in spectaculum, aut ornamentum
studiosa quadam luxuria, ut olim querebatur Seneca, conquisitus est hic
Thesaurus, nec ut cum blattis, tineis, situ, squalore bellum great: Sed ideo
pars Regiae facta est, ut ipsi Principi in propinquo, promptu sit
sanctissimarum sapientissimarum Animarum Senatus frequentissimus, cum quo
disserat, animum instruat, paret, ad quaicunque Regii officii parts componat.
Id enim exprimit ea, quam aureis Literis in vestibulo Bibliothecae legi voluit
(...), pulcerrima sane, gemmis omnibus auro contra carior: QUANDO OMNES PASSIM
LOQUUNTUR, ET DELIBERANT, OPTIMUM A MUTIS ET MORTUIS CONSILIUM EST; HOMINES
QUOQUE SI TACEANT, VOCEM INVENIENT LIBRI, ET QUAE. NEMO DICIT, PRUDENS
ANTIQUITAS SUGGERIT.

Eadem olim men's Alphonso Arragoniae Regi, cui quotidie in ore, Mortuos esse
optimos Consiliarios.

Nec aliud responsum tulit Zeno Citticus Philosophus, oraculum sciscitans,
(verba sunt Diogen. Laertii, lib. 8. de La Philosophorum, in princ.) quo
pacto optime vivere posset? nempe: (...), hoc est, Si mortuis colore concors
fieret, sive, ut Zeno vere interpretabatur, Si antiquorum mortuorum
familiaritate uteretur, eorumque Libros magna attentione studio, ad pallorem
us{que} legeret. In Bibliothecis enim, ut de Julia quondam cecinit Magnus
Calixtus, -- vitam vivunt, post sua fata loquuntur
Seclorumque minas superant, edacia rerum
Tempora, qui terris caput altius exeruerunt,
Naturaeque super fines, super ether celsum
Evexere animum. S^la haec monumenta super sunt,
Per quae pugnat adhuc, vincit gentesque, triumphat
Magnus Alexander, quin unquam magnanimorum
Quicquid in orb Ducum fuit, ex quo blanda Cupido
Laudis, humanas tentavit gloria mentes.
Nil vivit vivetque, nisi hic quod creditur: omne
Quod reliquum est, nox alta longa oblivio opacant.
Hic etiamnum Melpomene subnixa Cothurno,
Lata Sophocleis diducit hiatibus ora,
Confusosque lares tristia funera Regum,
Oedipodae Thalamos, saevum plangit Oresten,
Hic legere est, queis firmetur Respublica fulcris,
Et quid Erechthaeas olim servarit Athenas,
Quid pessum dederit: quibus artibus inclyta Roma
Creverit, populos, magnasque subegerit urbes:
Queis etiam vitiis sensim labefacta, ruinam
Traxerii, lapsu totum tremefecerit Orbem:
Hic recluduntur naturae arcana, sinusque
Daedalei, quicquid gremio complectitur, arctis
Inclusum fo iis, vigili cognoscere mente
In promptu est: hic descriptam pictamve tueri
Terrarum faciem vastae datur Amphitrites,
Tiranisque Globum, Lunae erroresque, laboresque
Et picturati fulgentia sidera coeli.
Quin ipsum ad coelos splendida panditur astra
Hic iter, a patribus qu^ndam per saxa, per ignes
Calcatum, largo respersum sanguinis imbre.


Et cum ipse Princeps nullum diem praetermittat, per quem cum mutis illis
Doctoribus, de difficillimis negotiis, sive sacris, sive civilibus, sive
militaribus, non colloquatur, fit, ut ipse sub clavibus quidem suis habeat
Bibliothecam, ejusdemque jus mancipium sibi retineat, usum vero eruditis
omnibus, praesertim ministris suis, quorum open, seu sacra, seu civilia tractat,
secum communem concedat, nec cuiquam alii, nisi qui nummo forsan harpacico hic
aliquid emtum veniat, deneget.

Silentio autem nequaquam praetereundum est, immensam istam Librorum, Autorum
Tractatuum molem, ipsum Principem aliquot amplissimis Indicibus in eum ordinem,
classes numeros, suimet indusiria manu redegisse, ut ad primam cujus^ibet, sive
Autoris, sive Materiae requisitionem, quocunque in genere disciplinarum,
praesto sit, primoque statim momento se tibi sistat respondeat, quem volueris,
aut vocaveris.

Nec ullus est in tanto hec Autorum, Librorum agmine, quem non noverit ipse
Princeps AUGUSTUS, ea in re non inferior CYRO, Persarum Monarchae, qui
unumquemque militum in numerosissimo suo exercitu, proprio nomine ad se vocare
poterat.

Sufficiant paucissima haec, de multis dicta, ceu stillicidium, ut vetus habet
verbum, de situla.

Experiatur qui volet, inspiciendi, penitius perserutandi copiam nactus, de
pretiosissimo hoc divinae humanae sapientiae Thesauro, idem, quod olim Regina
Sabaea de Sapientia Solomonis profitebatur, paucissimis tantum immutatis,
proferet. 3. Reg. 10. Non credidi verbis narrantium mihi de rebus sapientia
tua, usque dum venerim, viderint oculi mei: Sed ecce non indicatum mihi fuerat
ejus dimidium, superas sapientia bonitate famam, quam audiveram.

Si igitur, teste Julio Capitolino, Gordianum Imperatorem ad coelum tulit,
Sammonici Sereni morientis sexaginta duorum millium Librorum relicta
Bibliotheca, siquidem (verba sunt Capitolini) tantae Bibliothecae copia
splendore donatus, in famam hominum literatorum ore pervenit, adeoque alienis
plane sumptibus, diligentia clarus evasit: Si Ptolomaei, Attalus, Caesar,
Augustus sumtibus quidem suis, aut certe manubiis, aliena tamen diligentia,
clarissimi extiterunt: Quid de Principe AuGUSTO fiet, cujus hunc tantum
Thesaurum, non alienis sumtibus, non manubiis, non alienae diligentiae, sed
propriae curae sollicitudini, in cujus partem neminem hactenus vocavit,
propriis item, iisdemque vere Regiis impensis, (quibus alii, sive Baccho, sive
Dianae, sive Mercurio, sive aliis voluptatum illecebris litant) debemus? Ubi
vero estis Principes, ut vos urat ac excitet honestus aemulandi ignis?

Faxit DEUS, ut Thesaurus hic rerum divinarum, aeternarum, sit ipse aeternus,
neque prius, quam Mundi universa machina, laboret, aut intercidat.

FINIS.

