A DECLARATION Of the several Treasons, Blasphemies and Misdemeanours Acted,
spoken and published Against God, the late King, his present Majesty; the
Nobility, Clergy, City, Commonalty, c. By that Grand Wizard and Impostor
WILLIAM LILLY Of St Clements Danes; Otherwise called Merlinus Anglicus.

Presented to the Right Honourable the Members of the Houses of Parliament, in
order to secure him from acting any further Villainies against His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. White, at the seven Stars in St Paul's Church-yard,
1660.

To the Reader.
HEre is a true discovery of the malicious and treasonable expressions of
William Lilly, published frequently in several Almanacs and Pamphlets: Yet
notwithstanding, this infamous Fellow hath the impudence to offer at a
Vindication, which is published for him by the Parliamentary Intelligencer;
wherein he protests no Subject the King hath, to be more joyful of his arrival
into the Throne than himself; unto which Dominion (he saith) he said, and
publicly Printed 1644. the King should arrive in the twenty ninth, or
thirtieth year of his Age: which though it be most false, nor can Lilly show
any such thing, unless he mean the Cockeril in his Pamphlet; yet for avoiding
of dispute, it shall be admitted he said so; and then by comparing that with
the ensuing Observations, it will demonstratively appear how full of lies and
devilish malice this vile Wretch hath always been. The truth is, he was the
States Balaam, who for hire would curse and bless for the Rump and Oliver
according to their respective Instructions and Dictates, upon pretence of Art,
wherein he hath no more skill than the Beast his Predecessor rid on: There is
only this difference between the two Wizards, that God was pleased to make the
former an Instrument of blessing to the Children of Israel; but for our sins,
he hath permitted this Pretender to be more Instrumental than any to bring upon
the whole Nation the greatest curse that ever was. For proof of which
assertion, I refer you to the following Discourse. 1701

Several Treasons, Blasphemies, and Misdemeanours humbly offered to the Right
Honourable the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, against William
Lilly of S. Clements Danes; styling himself Merlinus Anglicus.
1. THat the said William Lilly, under pretence of his skill in Astrology and
his familiarity with Demons and wicked spirits, did urge on, and further that
horrible Murder of our late gracious Sovereign Charles the First; and for
lucre, and the base gain of 200 l per annum, which he hath confessed he
received from the Murderers by the hands of Mr Frost, did say, publish, and set
forth as follows, viz. In a Book by him published, and called, Observations
on the Life and Death of King Charles, p. 119. he saith, That the Parliament
did no other thing but Justice, and what in Conscience they were bound to do,
for preservation of this Comonwealth, in cutting off King Charles his head --
And presently falls a commending Mr Goodwin, another mercenary Wretch like
himself, who had lately writ a Book in defence of that abominable Act; and
saith, His Book is unanswerable.

2. That the said William Lilly did procure, or set on, or knew of the
procurement, and setting on, and did personally know that Regicide, whoever he
was, that had the savage heart to execute that bloody fact of beheading the
King: For in his Book, called Monarchy or no Monarchy, p. 51. speaking about
the Death of King Charles, he hath these words: Many have curiously enquired
who it was that cut off the Kings head: I have no permission to speak of such
things; only thus much I say* He that did it is as valiant and resolute a man
as lives, and one of a competent fortune, c.

3. That the firmer his Masters might stand, and the longer he enjoy his
Salary; he in several Books and Almanacs most traitorously and maliciously did
publish many false slanders, lies, and treasons, in derogation of the honour of
our King and Nation, viz. In his book called, Observations upon the Life and
Death of King Charles, p. 79. That the Original of the Family of the Stuarts
were but Bailiffs or Stewards to a Scottish Family. And presently after, in the
same page, most falsely avers, That the King left one or two natural Children
behind him. And saith,

Page. 81. That the King was never sorrowful for the slaughter of his People.
Pa. 85. Taxes his late Majesty as guilty of his Fathers death. Page. 114. That
he cared not for the Nobles in England, and beggared the Prince of Orange. Page.
116. That he was more lamented as he was a King, than for any affection any one
had to his Person as a Man. And many hundreds such venomsome passages as these.

4. That the said William Lilly, hired as abovesaid, the better to secure his
Masters Titles, and to raise them monies, Traitorously published in his
Almanac 1651 p. 5. That seeing the Bastard Norman had long since overcome our
Fore-fathers, by that very Law we had expulsed his Successors, and that we will
maintain it for ever. And in the Epistle to the Almanac 1655. The Bastards
brood is left for ever. That God Almighty was the Parliaments (viz. the Rumps)
loving Patron and Guardian; that all Persons that should endeavour to destroy
them, should perish. And for a final Judgement, take his positive opinion, in
his Almanac 1650. p. 2. That Providence, and the inevitable decrees of Heaven,
hath at the last produced this Catastrophe, this Innovation, this Change of
Monarchy into a free State; against which whoever lifts up his hand, must
expect divine vengeance from Heaven to fall upon his Carcase, and a woeful
destruction upon his earthly possessions in this world. And for obtaining of
moneys, whereof he expected part himself, behold, this grand Impostor offers to
all that party, and to the simple whom he could seduce, his General Warranty
for their security of those ill-gotten Lands, in these words, in Almanac 1651.
p. 1. in the Epistle: So that now you may safely buy Houses, purchase Lands,
either Crown, Bishops, Deans, or Delinquents, with full confidence of
possessing your Purchases until Doomsday: There is no scruple in the
Parliaments Title -- Nor shall we have any more Kings to reign over us.

5. That so soon as Oliver Cromwell had turned ( Lillies Masters) out of doors,
the said William Lilly for 100 l. per annum did then set forth and publish in
his Almanac 1654. That that Parliament were unthankful to all that served
them; that they had private ends of their own; that no faith was to be given to
their Votes; that they Lorded it over others; being the day before their
dissolution honourable, but the next day no more worshipful than a -- And then
in order to settle the said Oliver in his Power, and to derogate from his own
Prince, in his Almanac 1655. p. 1. he saith, That the Honourable and high
Actions of Oliver are so plainly delivered by him, that unl^ss an envious
Generation of obstinate people disparage his glorious Actions, they must
acknowledge our Genius guided by the Providence of God* (Oh highest blasphemy!)
to have been his Highness Trumpet. And then speaking of the durability of his
Highness Government, (as he calls it) and of his Reign, saith, He is a new
Progeny, or the first of his Race, who hath enjoyed so vast a Power; and
whoever of the English, or any other Nation, shall set themselves against him,
will consume themselves like Chaff against the wind. And along in that Epistle
Chants out nothing but high Parasitical Elogiums to his new Prince Cromwell,
saying, He is naturally, and supernaturally fitted to this great Work: And
setting his figure from the Protectors accepting his Sword and Seal, saith,
That the Government or Quality thereof at that time taking its first rise or
growth, will not in many Ages be determined. And much after this traitorous
manner doth he set out Richard, the glorious Sun and hopes (as Lilly saith) of
the Nation.

6. The said William Lilly, on purpose traitorously to vilify and asperse our
now gracious Sovereign, and to keep his Subjects from all hopes of his
Restoration, hath wilfully and maliciously, and by the spirit instigation of
his wicked Demons divulged as follows, viz. Whereas one Grebnerus had
formerly writ a Prophecy, which many loyal persons in both Nations (though not
trusting much to such old sayings) did suppose his now Majesties Person;
wherein was contained, that Carolus filius Caroli erit Carolo magno major: this
Wizard Lilly in all his writings and discourses wrests it to another sense; as
in his Almanac 1652. Ep. p. 1. Or shall we have any more Kings to rule over
us? I (saith Lilly) cleared that Point in my Monarchy or no Monarchy 1651.
together with Grebnerus his Prophecy, as also, the true State of England for
700 years to come: I have therein fully answered some Prophesies produced by
Presbyterians, very simply and untruly, according to their old manner, which,
they say, intend the present King of Scotland shall be greater than Charles the
Great. These Priests accursed me with Bell, Book, and Candle, c. whenas they
knew the Scottish King with a Million of Vermyn, and some men in Arms, were in
Lancashire, c. And in his Almanac 1651. how traitorously and maliciously doth
he utter these words! Then, viz. after the white King is dead, shall the
Chicken of the Eagle build on the top of the highest Rocks of all the land of
Brittain, rule over nothing but men as rude as Mountains; and that upon
undeniable grounds, the Chicken of the Eagle is the present Scottish King, he
being the first-born Son of Charles, who was without dispute the true white
King, c. and after scornfully calling him, Titular King, and in a worse case
than a Constable, c. And in his Almanac 1652. he saith, that his Majesties
coming into England was an act of madness, and a creeping in, and not of
reason, c. And p. 12. That he should not be established in that year, nor in
any year hereafter; and though he did escape (and praised be God evermore for
that escape) he may live a wandering life. Let the Orchades suffice or satisfy
his hungry Appetite, and those other Mountains and cold Islands give him a
sufficient Patrimony; and he might think himself happy, if he could enjoy those
barren Islands for his Patrimony, without disturbance, c.

And of such like stuff as this is, are his many Books made of, abusing the
Nobility, That they were not to be trusted; The Clergy, calling them Baals
Priests, Blind guides and Pseudo-Priests; and on the contrary extolling the
Phanaticks and Red-coats, calling the one the Saints of the earth, and vaunting
that the other had fought against two Kings, traversed the Heathen high-lands
of Scotland, c. Nay, his boldness did arise to that height, that in many places
he hath predicted dangers of death by stab or otherwise to his now Majesty, and
hath set a Period in many places to his life: But as the good God hath
preserved him from the one, so he will of his great mercy continue his life to
us, to his honour and our comfort, maugre all the malice of this mercenary
fellow, that for money will say any thing in the world.

All which being truly taken out of his Books, and by him often acknowledged to
be his, and will be proved by sufficient witnesses, if need require; and he
having seduced many thousands of people to their ruin, by his false and lying
Predictions, in making them believe that the day of our deliverance should
never come; and generally, all good people being much afraid that by his malice
he may raise some wicked storms, or do other hurt, which may be prevented if he
were in hold, for that the devil leaves his servants when they are secured;
And lastly, for that he is looked upon as the only man now in England guilty of
all our sufferings: It is therefore referred humbly to the consideration of
this Right Honourable Parliament, whether it be not very just that he should be
excepted as to his estate, which is considerable, being the wages of his
arch-Villanies, and he himself kept in such security as the good people of
England may be secured from his infernal Actings. And God Almighty bless your
Consultations.

FINIS.

