THE DIFFERENCES, CAVSES, AND IVDGEMENTS OF URINE: ACCORDING TO THE BEST
WRITERS THEREOF, BOTH OLD and new, summarily collected.

BY I. Fletcher.

LONDON,Printed by Iohn Legatt. 1641.



The contents of this Book.
AN admonition to the Reader of the order of the book, and authors from whence
it was gathered. A preface wherein the judgement by urine is preferred before
that by the pulse. Also the generation of urine in mans body. Cap. 1. General
considerations in judgement of urines, how many things hinder judgement in
respect of the urinal, physician, and urine it self to the 5. page, and how
many things alter the urine in respect of age, sex, complexion, time of the
year, kind of life, c. to the 10. page. 2. Of the substance of urine thin to
the 14. page, thick to the 17. page, and mean to the 19. 3 Of clearness and
darkness of urine to the 24. page. 4. Of 21. colours of urine, page. 25. where
the reader must add after pale, subspicous, subpallidus, these words. If you
seethe a piece of the rind of pomegranate, and then put to it thrice as much
clean water, it will make a pale colour. Also at flaxen, spiceus, add these
words. But if you put thereto a little or none of clean water, it will be
flaxen colour. 5 Of substance and colour jointly together, and first of thin
urine with his colours, to the 34. page, thick with his colours to the 44.
page. 6 Quantity of urine much to the 48. page, little to the 49. page. 7 Of
the contents of the urine in general, and first where contents want, the
division of the contents, page 53. of their colour, 53. substance thick, 55.
thin, 56. quantity, 57. 8 Of contents in special, and first of the 15.
deformed contents in the sediment to the 77. page. In the middle region, page
77. in the uppermost region, page. 79. and here of the colours, 80. deformed
contents, 81. of the crown, 82. his colours, 83. of some, froth, bubbles, 85.
and 3. differences, 89. Drops of fat, 90. 9 Smell of urine, 90. 10 Manner of
pissing, 95. 11 Suppression of urine, 98. 12 Of what parts of the body urine
gives signification, 101. 13 Of concoct, crude, and dangerous urines, 101. 14
A methodical practise in judgement of urine, 107. 15 Of the qualities,
commodities, and medicines of urine, and of diseases touching urine, and the
remedies thereof, 117. An Alphabetical Table to the whole Book.
An admonition to the READER.
THis Treatise following I first digested into tables for mine own private use,
which afterwards was by my friend converted into this form to fit the press.
And therefore the studious reader must still remember how one part follows
another in order: and that which is spoken generally before a division, to be
understood of all the members following under that head according to the law of
method. A word is enough to him that is acquainted with tables. The Treatise it
self is an abridgement wholly gathered out of other men's writings, I challenge
nothing to my self but the collection and disposition hereof. Wherein for
better satisfaction of the Reader, I have many times cited the Author, whose
testimony I use, and now and then I have quoted the page of such books as I
then followed, and whereof I set down the catalogue, where, when, and in what
form they were printed.

Willichius and Reusner Basileae, 1592. 8. Argenterius de urinis, 1591. 8.
Record in English. London. 8. Actuarius, Parisiis, 1548. 8. Aegidius Basileae,
1506. 8. Weckers Syntaxis, Basileae, 1582. fol. Fernelius. Francofurti, 1593.
8. Montanus de Excrementis. Venetiis, 1554. 8. Cappivaccius de urinis.
Servestae, 1595. 8. Vassaeus de urinis. Lugduni, 1645. 16. Io. Hasfurtus.
Venetiis, 1584. 4. Salvianus. Romae, 1587. 8. Blosii Hollerii theorica
medicina. Argentinae, 1565. 8.
The Preface.
AMongst all signs of sickness or health whereby the skilful Physician is led
into the knowledge of the state of the body, two are of most general and
certain signification which are taken from the pulse and urine, without which
all the knowledge of physic besides, is obscure, doubtful, and uncertain.
Whereof the first shows the estate of the heart and arteries, the second of
the liver and veins. Both of such special use in signification of diseases
incident to mans body; that joined together, they certainly instruct the
Physician whether the disease tends to health or death, but whether of these
two severally considered doth give more certain signification, I had rather
leave it to be determined of others who can better do it then my self: yet
under their correction me think that the urine gives the most manifest
certain and general signification of all diseases; because with the blood it
is conveyed into all parts of the body, and from thence returns back again
in the veins to the liver and vessels of urine, bringing with it some note of
the state and disposition of all those parts from whence it comes. Neither is
there any other excrement that hath so many differences as the urine, neither
from which so many significatios may be taken as from it, in the substance,
colour, quantity, contents, smell, manner of pissing, c. in which the Physician
may with more profit exercise himself then in the six differences of pulses,
the art whereof Hippocrates either never knew, or neglected. And Galon
confesses of himself, that he spent 20. years in study that way, before he
could attain the knowledge of the ( systole) or contraction of the pulse in
the arteries, which being unknown, the pulse also must remain unknown; and
yet it is uncertain whether Galen indeed ever did attain thereto. From Galens
time for 1200. years after, this knowledge lay buried in the black dungeon of
ignorance, until Iosephus Struthius brought it to some light: and no marvel;
for the continual mutability and alteration of the pulse cannot be
comprehended by art. For as the affections of mans mind, anger, fear, joy,
sorrow, love, hatred, springing from the heart do vary; so the pulse differs
in every moment. So we read that Erasistratus the Physician perceived by the
pulse of Antiochus son to the King of Syria and Persia, that he was in love
with Stratonica his step-mother. And Galen saith that he perceived by the
often change of the pulse of a woman, that she was in love with Pylades.
Besides that, the tunicles of the arteries, the skin and flesh in the wrest of
the hand where the pulse is felt, and the skin and flesh of the Physicians hand
feeling the pulse, are in some harder and in some softer. Again, the patients
hand differing in heate or cold, or manner of position, higher, lower, or on
the one side, and the Physicians hand touching the arteries softly, or pressing
them, and infinite other circumstances which make such sudden and momentary
alteration of the pulse that as in ancient time, so at this present amongst us
there be very few skilful in this part of judgement. But on the contrary side
in urine there is no such labour or cause of doubt, for we may see it, and
consider well of it, for many hours together, and find no alteration therein.
And of this Hippocrates, Galen, Aegideus, Actuarius, Avicen, and infinite
others in all ages have delivered precepts, and gathered judgements, and
therefore as a part of physic better known, and of more certainty then the
pulse, I have in this short Treatise handled, divided into his differences, and
to every difference I have added his judgment together with a reason thereof.
And in many places I have more especially distinguished it, not only by other
differences of the urine, but also by other accidents of the disease it self.
As for example, page. 47. one signification of much urine is a consumption of
the whole body, whereto I have added other signs by the urine, as that it is
somewhat fatty, in colour palew, reddish, high coloured, and without other
signs of concoction. And hereof I presently annexe this cause; for so the
profitable fat, moisture, humours, and substantial parts of the body are
molten, dissolved, and voided by urine. The rest I leave to the diligence of
the studious reader, who with small consideration may easily conceive the same.
And here I would make an end, but that I think it not amiss in few words to
show the generation of urine in mans body, and the vessels thereto belonging.

The meat and drink received by the mouth, and descending down into the
stomach, and there concocted together, incorporated and made one substance (
chylus) and thence passing by an issue in the bottom of the stomach (
pylorus) to the first gut ( duodenum) and from thence to the hungry gut (
ieiunum) from thence again five of the eight mesaraicall veins suck so much
as is profitable nourishment (the rest being unprofitable for nourishment is
voided by stool) which again is conveyed into vena porta, and at length after
many purifications and concoctions in the parts before mentioned; to the liver,
where it is converted into blood, and thence sent into the hollow vein, where
it is again more purified, the excrementitious parts being sequestered,
separated, and sent to other places, as the choler to the gall, melancholy to
the spleen and the watery or wheyish part to the emulgent or sucking veins,
from whence again it is drawn of the reins where it is altered perfectly
into urine, which as unprofitable descends into the waterconduits ( ureteres)
and thence into the bladder which at length at a mans pleasure by help of the
muscle shutting the neck of the bladder is voided out by the yard. Yet some
part of this thin wheyish humour is not after this sort conveyed from the liver
to the bladder, but as I have showed, cap. 12. is together with the blood in
the veins derived into all parts of the body, and at length returning back
again the same way, is expelled by the yard. Seeing then urine passes through
so many vessels, and receives so many concoctions and preparations before it
can be expelled, it must needs admit many alterations. And yet we see by daily
experience that great drinkers, those which drink some diuretike potion, and
especially those who are troubled with the pissing evil, do peace out
presently after drink not concoct, nor much altered from the drink received.
Hereof Galen 3. de facult. not. cap. 15. yields these reasons. The great
desire of the stomach to receive drink, the thin, piercing, and subtle
substance of the drink speedily running into all parts: the wideness of the
passages, and lastly the strong attractive faculty of the reins, all which
concurring together, do cause the drink received so quickly to pass through
the parts of the body without any great alteration. Yet some the better to
satisfy these doubts have devised, and by arguments laboured to confirm a
readier and shorter course for the drink received to pass to the reins by the
wind-pipe, great artery ( aorta) emulgent veins, and bladder. But because this
opinion is so contrary to the reputed and received truth of Hippocrates, Galen,
and all Physicians, as also that it imagines another free passage (beside the
meat-pipe, through the wind-pipe and lungs: whereas we find by experience that
a little dust in travelling, or a crum of bread in eating falling into the same
is ready to choke a man, as a kernel of a raison did Anacreon the Poet; and
that therefore nature hath ordained a cover for the wind-pipe ( epiglottis)
lest in eating or drinking something should pass that way. And the Physicians
do forbid much talk or disputation at meat, lest the cover being opened
thereby should let something pass that way. I cease further to commend it.

Of the instruments and parts by which urine is engendered and passes, mark
this figure following.
A. is the liver.

B. the hollow vein.

C. veins by which the reins do draw the urine, and therefore be called the
sucking veins, venae emulgentes.

D. the reins.

E. The water-pipes ureteres.

F. is the bladder.

G. the spout of the yard.

All other parts beside, appertain to generation and seed.



A perfect form of the urinal, wherein the urine according to his height is
divided into three regions for the distinction of the three contents mentioned,
Chap. 7, 8.
1, 2, 3, 4. the lowest region for the sediment.

5, 6, 7, 8. the middle region for the swim.

9, 10, 11, 12. the uppermost region for the cloud.

In the top whereof the black line going through the thickness of the urinal is
the circle or crown



CHAP. I.
Of general considerations in judgement of Vrines.
IVdgements of an urine are considered in respect of the urinal of the
Physician, of the urine it self. 1. The urinal
In respect of the urinal, which ought not to be of any colour, for so it would
alter the apparent colour of the urine. Not strait or broad beneath, which
alter the contents. Not open in the top, for so dust or other filth might fall
in: air, cold, or heat might soon alter it. Not stopped with Woollen or
Linen, for so lint or Cotton might fall in. Not too near, nor too far off,
for the substance too near might appear thicker: and too far off, thinner.
Aegid. 10. Argent. 91. contrariwise in Wine and Vinegar. Capivac. 88. Not
unclean within.

The Urinal therefore ought to be a clear glass, or pure crystal, without
any colour at all or notable thickness. Broad, round, and oblonge below, and
straiter above, conically ascending like to a mans bladder which it
represents; that a fit place may remain for the fashion of the sediment: and
stopped at the top with leather, paper, c. that nothing fall in, nor air
easily get in.

Physician.
2. In respect of the Physician, who may not see the urine in a place either too
dark, or by candle-light, for so the colour will appear altered. Or else too
light, as the Sunne-beames make the colour more remiss.

Therefore put your hand or a black cloth betwixt the light and the Urinal on
the opposite part of the Urinal, that the colour and contents may be the
better discerned, and your eyes be not dazaled with the light.

Urine.
3. In respect of the urine it self: wherein are considered, 1. Collection. 2.
Things that hinder judgement. 3. Differences.


1. Collection.
Collection. 1. When nourishment is perfectly digested, which is commonly that
which is first made in the morning after the nights sleep. For that which is
made lately after eating or drinking, or fit of an ague, hath neither colour,
consistence, nor contents, being not concoct. Argent 91.

2. Take the whole urine and not the part, so much as is made at one time; but
mingle not urines made at several times, but keep them several both for
quantity, colour, and contents.

3. When the urine is new made and yet warm, it is best to see the colour,
substance, and perspecuity; at what time you may see also the quantity and
smell.

4. When it is settled in the Urinal fully it is best to see the contents and
bubbles. You may well also then see the substance. Actuar. Fernel. 452.

5. Let it not be kept past six hours, for being longer kept it waxes
corrupt. Arg. 91. ex Avicenna.

6. Yet it is good to see the urine lately made, and oftentimes after to
observe the perseverance or alteration of the substance, froth, and
perspecuity, c. Salvian. 222.

Things which hinder judgement. 1. Much shaking of it, or pouring it out of one
vessel into another.

Things which hinder judgement.
2. Cold or wind to congeal it and make it turn thick as in Winter: but
being chafed at the fire it returns again, except it be too long kept. Cap.
2.

3. Wind to move or shake it.

4. Placed in the heate of the Sun, or near the fire, whereby that which is
thin and subtle is drawn out, and the rest remains thick, dreggy: and so
sometimes the urine that was made thick and troubled, by great heate of the
fire waxes clear, and the spume or bubble vanishes away, which otherwise
would continue. Salvian. 227.

5. Meats and drinks lately taken before alter the colour, quantity, substance,
and smell sometimes.

6. Medicines taken, as Rheubarb, Saffron, Cinnamon, broth of Cherries, make
the urine yellow; Cassia, blackish; Oil of Bay, Henbane, or Vnguentum
Martiatum anointed, sena rubia mayor, Cantharides* applied to any part of the
body, reddish.

7. Exercise, fasting, watching, labour, anger, fear, vomiting, sweating,
purging, c. alter the colour, substance, quantity, contents.

8. Reins or Bladder affected hinder the judgement of the inner parts. Fernel.



Principal differences of the urin.
Principal are, 1. Substance. Cap. 2.

2. Quality, and that either first as heate exceeding perceived by the patient
in making it, as in inflammation of the liver, or by the Physician touching the
urinal with his hand.

2 Heate moderate or temperate.

3 Deficient or under temperate.

Or second quality perceived. 1. by sight, as perspicuity, light through, or
dark and troubled. Cap. 3.

Colour. Cap. 4.

Taste, but that being too base for the Physician, we leave to speak of it.

Smell. Cap. 9.

3 Substance and colour jointly, Cap. 5.

4 Quantity, Cap. 6.

5 Contents wanting three regions, sediment, swim, cloud: where we also
consider substance, colour, quantity. Cap. 7. 8.

Contents deformed.

Contents duly knit.

Less principal differences.
Less principal, which though they do not immediately help to judge of the
urine, yet they declare the nature of the urine and griefs of the body. Such
arise from the causes; as choler, melancholy, sleep, watching, diseases.

From the effects, signifying health, death, griefs of the stomach, head,
liver, breast, veins.

From the manner of pissing. Cap 10.

From suppression of urine. Cap. 11.

The best urine simply.
The best urine simply in a perfect and absolute temperate whole man, which is
the rule of all the rest, is that which is made without heate, as in burning
agues. Capivac. 83. without cold, Capivac. 11. pain, or stench. Of colour
palew or light saffron, perspicuous moderately, Capivac. 113. Of substance
mean. Of quantity likewise mean, like to the former days urine, and
proportionable to the drink received yesterday and other days before, and
somewhat less because some is spent and wasted in the body. Having contents
white, smooth, equal, settling down to the bottom of the urinal, not having
bubbles, filaments, or any other evil contents. Having sediment likewise
white, smooth, equal, pyramidally ascending, nor tattered, ragged, or
dispersed, neither cleaving together, so but that they depart asunder, the
urinal being shaken, and ascend lightly without trouble of the urine. And all
these thus continuing long. Montan. 46. B.

The best urine in respect of age
The best urine in respect of age, sex, time of the year, kind of life,
complexions, is as follows.

1 First for children, urine is best of substance thick. For thin is lethal.
Salvian. 33. 206.

2 Of quantity much.

3 Of colour white a little by continual feeding on milk, Salv. 204. or
because choler or blood to colour the urine rests or is drowned by too much
moisture. Also by debility, long sleep, much rest, which because they cannot
well move, increases moisture and decays heate.

2 The best for springalls, hath sediment heaped and increased, substance
thick, but rather inclining to thin. Colour yellow or light saffron: black
deadly Salvian. 93. contents more then in men.

3 For men that which is set down first for a perfect rule of the rest.

4 For old men with substance thin, colour white, sediment little.

Sex.
5 For women whole. In substance rather thick then thin, dark, troubled, with
many things swimming in it, not so clear as in men.

In colour declining from light or palew towards white with some darkness.

Quantity much.

Sediment impure, much thicker and whiter then in men's urine.

Distinction between men and women's urine is easily known by often comparing
them together. Fernel.

Time of the year.
6 In respect of the time of the year, best urine beginning in the spring, of
colour white and pale, quantity greater, contents more thicker and more raw. In
the spring proceeding, colour from pale and flaxen to palew and light; contents
mean, substance equal. In summer beginning, colour palew and light saffron,
substance thinner, sediment thinner, white, smooth, equal. In Summer
proceeding, colour yellow saffron, substance very thin, sediment little, thin
and declining to white.

In Autumn beginning, sediment little yet without fault. In Autumn proceeding
all mean.

In Winter beginning, colour white, substance thicker. Fernel. Contents more and
rawer. In Winter proceeding, colour white, quantity greater, contents more and
cruder.

K^nde of Life.
7 In respect of the kind of life, as wherein there is much exercise, fasting,
anger makes commotion of spirits and humours, watching, meats of hot
operation, the urine is more coloured, and sediments fewer at the beginning as
long as those passions do inflame the heate of the body, and there is moisture
which may be kindled; but that failing, and the heate languishing and decaying,
the colour waxes more and more remiss again. Argent. 36. Salvian. 71. so in
agues beginning, the urine is white, after that (heate increasing) yellow, and
red; and in declination the heate decaying, more remiss again. So urine voided
after large drinking is first white, after more coloured, and at length
returns to his former colour again and consistence.

And where there is much idleness, gluttony, surfeits, sleep, drunkenness, use
of cold meates, the urine is white and thick, sediment much and crude,
natural heate being oppressed and suffocated.

Complexion.
8 In respect of complexions, the flegmatike hath urine of colour white,
substance thick, quantity increased, and the sediment more raw.

The choleric yellow as pure gold, much coloured, and of substance thin.

The melancholic white, with a certain dimness, because melancholy is in
quality cold and dry. But if melancholy be voided, in substance the urine is
black, as in critical evacuations of melancholy. Aegid. 37.

The sanguine reddish with a certain darkness, substance indifferent thick

CHAP. II
Of the substance of Urine.
THe substance of urine is either thin, thick, or mean.


Thin substance.
Urine thin as water, such as every urine is of it own nature, neither can it
wax thick by seething having little earthly substance: neither congeal
through cold in our bodies, which be hot as long as we live, is not of so good
signification as thick urine, because it signifies crudity and debility:
whereas thick urine signifies some separation and beginning of concoction, as
also strength of the expulsive faculty to expel gross matter, and mixed with
urine: but thin urine doth signify either.

Obstruction.
1. Obstruction in the veins or liver with an ague, of the reins and vessels
of urine without an ague by tough and clammy humours, cloddes of blood, tumors,
stone, flesh growing, whereby the thicker part of the urine is stayed, and the
thinner in small quantity, as it were through a colander or strainer is let
pass, and may be known by the pain in the obstructed part. Salv. 11.

Crudity.
2. Or crudity and lack of concoction and separation, through cold and want of
natural heate, or abundance of unnatural heate in an ague, and other signs
of heate, as in simple distemperatures without mixture of humours, as is seen
in cold, much drinking of wine, water and drink.

Pissing presently after drinking, and especially which provokes urine, and
staying not in the body until humours be concocted to ishue with it to give it
substance and tincture: for the second urine staying longer, is thicker and
more coloured, and so the third and the fourth, as sooner or later, more or
less thick and coloured, as concoction and heate is more or less strong.
Capiv. 103. and at length returns to his former substance.

In the beginning of diseases when all humours are raw and unfit to be concoct,
the urine is white and thin, and after that heate increasing is yellow and red,
and in declination the heate decreasing more remiss again, until he return
unto his former state of health.

In furfetting, drunkenness, gluttony, and especially pissing presently after.

When the stomach is cold, whereby meat and humours are raw, and so sent to the
liver.

When the liver of it self is cold and weak, receiving them raw from the
stomach, and sends them so to the reins. For the error of the first
concoction is not taken away in the second.

When the reins and vessels of urine through weakness are not able to draw or
expel any humour but thin. Capiv. 86.

Colour white in children signifies death. Salvian. 24.

Likewise in weak persons.

And in sharp diseases. Argent. 24.

Continuance of the disease, in intermitting agues, or strong persons.

Recidivation or returning again of the disease, being made on the critical
day.

Conclusion of the humour.
3. Or thin urine signifies conversion of the humour another way with signs
of concoction, and more coloured urine precedent, as to the whole body with
pain in the whole body, and thin water long continuing, the humour
regurgitating into all places, as in the small Pocks, Measils, Impostumes,
Dropsy, Botches, and Felons. Aegid. 230.

Into the stomach, and causes upbraidings and vomitings.

To the brain in a frenzy with a burning ague, and is mortal.

Galen never knew any escape, Mont.

To the Liver with pain in the right side.

To the pores of the skin in sweat.

To the short ribs, arme-holes, neck, privy parts, gathering to an head,
making an impostume.

To the belly in dropsies beginning. For after the matter increasing, the urine
waxes thicker.

To the reins in Nephritide.

To the seat in the Hemerodes.

To the joints, as to the huckle-bone in sciatica, knees, feet, hands in the
gout, drawing humours to them. Argent 24.

To the guts, as in dysenteries, flixes, laskes, looseness.

To the cods in Hydrocele.

To the mother, as immoderate flux of the terms. Record.

To other parts that are weak and grieved whither humours fall. Or being
inflamed, draw humours to them much like cupping-glasses.

Thick substance.
Urine thick as syrrup boiled to his height, or yellow choler in the gall.
Aegid. 23. is always made by mixture of other humours, as blood, choler, fleume
not natural, abounding melancholy, raw humours, purulent matter, seed,
gravel, or filaments. The farther placed from you the thinner it appears,
and hath always moates stirring up and down contrary in both to Wine or
Vinegar, besides the smell. Argent. 29. which either may be cleared externally,
being chafed at the fire, returning again, (except it hath stood too long, or
stood too long by the fire or in Sun, Arg. 47. or such as wax thick, and
are turned by standing in the cold extinguishing the heate and spirits of the
urine:) or may be cleared of it self in the Urinal, the thicker and grosser
part settling down to the sediment: and this hath always a good signification
that good concoction now begins in the liver, and that which is concoct hath
now some form though unperfect: but while the heate is fervent in the veins,
some terrestrial matter is mixed therewith, which is not yet perfectly
separated by the heate. Look after in the declination of the disease. Wecker.

Or this thick urine may not be clee^ed though chafed at the fire, which
comes either from the vessels and passages of urine, as the reins, bladder,
yard, be^ng too open and large. Fernel. 449. or ^xulcerated and apostumated,
whereby ^he urine is tronbled, and with purulent matter, raw humour, or seed is
white, of ^loud red, and sometimes with gravel and ^laments. All to be known
by smell and ^riefe in the part. Fern. 39. Arg. 22.

Or else it comes from some supe^our member, as liver, spleen, veins,
stomach, where it is always an argument ^f heate oppressed and crudity; not
that ^aturall heate is distempered, but suffocated through abundance of
humours. Fern. 449. and is to be understood either of one urine made at the
same time, or many, urines made on several days, and several times of the
sickness. As in the beginning, where it shows abundance of gross, raw, and
flegmaticke humours: which cause head-aches in tertian and quotidian agues, and
such urine now made, when as nature hath made no concoction or separation, it
is through weakness of nature, of unnatural heat (symptomaticall and ill) and
other ill signs joined withal, as feeble pulse, old age, Winter weakness: it
is mortal, except in diseases of choler, and blood, which are soon concocted.
Arg. 29. but with good signs, as youth, strength, good sediment, continuance
of the disease not desperate Weck. 13. Sal. 36. 138. Cap. 100.

State, a better sign, because now natural heat beginning to prevail, doth
separate and expel humours, which nourish the disease in strength of the
patient, and other good signs; otherwise, that unnatural heat putrefactive
begins to move the humours, as chances often in pestilential agues, Weck.
13.

Declining, if thin water was made before some days, and after it is made,
it clears in the Urinal. Sal. 201. when as natural heate hath made some
concoction, and so expels the humour offending, especially being made on the
critical day, it is a very good sign, for thus many diseases are cured, as
the sciatica, gout. Sal. 37. pain in the joints.

And when the humour offending is expelled, and the patient recovered, the
urine returns to his colour and mean consistence again. Arg. 25. But if it
wax thin and white too suddenly, or hastily, before the humour be expelled, and
the patient recovered, it seems the humour is converted another way, where it
makes an impostume drawing to a head, or to the brain as before in thin urine:
look immediately before in thick humour which clears of it self.

Mean substance.
Mean urine, neither so thin as water, neither so thick as beasts water, but
as white Wine or clear Ale: which waxes thick in the glass, through cause
external, as cold or longer standing: for so in Winter urines turn sooner
then in Summer: and being near the fire or heate return again, except the
natural heate of the urine be totally extinct by too long, standing, or by
being in too hot a place as the sun, or too long by the fire, or in warm
water, whereby the heate and spirit of the urine is dissipated, rarefied, and
evaporated out of the urine, Argent. 47. These two return not.

Or through cause internal, Videl. 1. want of natural heate: as old men's
urines and those that are in recovery of their health, do easily change and
wax thick, and being chafed at the fire return again, except they have stood
long, c. 2. Abundance of humours which nature can neither concoct nor detain,
but is almost suffocated therewith, as their urines which have crammed
themselves with meat drink are more easily turned and wax thick. And both
these in whole men do signify health impaired, because heate hath entered into
some raw matter in the veins, and clears it by rarefying the parts thereof,
which heate and spirits being expelled by external cold, the urine becomes
thick, Wecker.

In sick men in the beginning, ill, because the concoction is of unnatural
heate. After the beginning with other good signs, concoction of natural
heate: but with ill signs crudity of unnatural heate.

But if the urine continue mean in the glass, and yet after it hath settled,
the thicker part falls to the sediment, it signifies good concoction in the
stomach, liver, veins, and lively natural heate. Fernel. 449.

CHAP. III.
Of clearness and darkness of Urine.
Clear urine.
Urine is also either perspicuous, light through or clear, through which a man
may discern his knockles. Record. and is not all one with thin urine: for
white wine is thin, and yet often dark, and not light through. Distilled wine
is thin in substance, yet troubled and dark. This signifies in whole men (if
it be moderately perspicuous) perfect digestion, good humours, abundance of
natural heat, which at length doth separate and distinguish the hypostasis.

In sick men if it be too clear and saffron colour, signifies yellow choler,
unnatural heate, as in agues. Weck. More remiss, or darker, crude, and white,
flegmatike, and watery matter, and signifies cold, crudity, and continuance of
the disease, and the more coloured the better. Cappivac. 113.

But in judgement of clear and perspicuous urine in sick persons, we must
always consider how their urine was in their health. For if it be the same
urine that was in their health, it signifies no ill: but if it change from
less clear to more clear, and in colour saffron; then choler is augmented:
in white colour phlegm, and contrariwise.

Dark urine
Or that is dark, troubled, not light through, through which one cannot see
his knockles, is not all one with thick urine, as Galen thought. Salvian. For
fish-glew, horne, white of an egg, oil, and glass molten, and blackish wine
are thick in substance, yet clear perspicuous, or light through. Fern. 450.

1. Hereof are three kinds, whereof the first is dark accidentally by outward
cold after it is made, as by cold air, cold water, winter: and this of all
other is most thick and dark, and doth stain the Urinal, especially in the
crown or top, with a certain white clammy thin humour, which being chasted at
the fire, or in warm water, returns to it self again as it was made
(except it hath stood too long, Cappivac. 107.) whereby the inward heate of the
urine is wholly extinguished. But that some urines more, some less, some
sooner, some later, some scarcely at all wax dreggy, thick, troubled, and
dark, is to be imputed to the impurity and want of heate in the urine it
self, and outward cold extinguishing the internal heate, rarefying,
dispersing, and drawing out the spirits and natural heate of the urine, which
being dissolved the urine waxes troubled, thick, and dark, Argent. 47. and
this hath small signification in judgement of urines, saving in sharpe diseases
it signifies beginning of concoction. Fernel. 450.

The other two kinds are dark when they are first made. Dreggy urine, and
confused urine.

2. Dreggy urine is, whose substance of it self, or by some internal mixture
is thick, and such as come often from filthy and unclean reins: and this by
chafing at the fire or other heate, cannot be altered and made clear, and hath
many meates flying, floating, and swimming in the urine, which by standing
settle down to the bottom, and becomes a thick residence, whereby the rest
of the urine waxes clear. And this is like to wine troubled with mixture of
dregs, such comes from the reins, or bladdder, troubled with humours, which
urine brings forth with it new ulcer, blood: old ulcer, rotten, purulent, and
filthy matter.

Those which be troubled with ache in their reins, make usually such urines
through blood, matter, or other filthy impurity.

Veins abounding with gross humours, which natural heate can scarcely
concoct, and so some part is voided: hereof rise long diseases, head-aches,
present or to come, and if it continue long lethargy or veternus.

Critical evacuation suddenly made after long obstruction of the veins,
liver, reins, spleen, in whole men after exercise, in sick men in declination
of diseases, especially in long continuing agues, as quartain, and in diseases
of the liver, spleen, and breaking sorth impostumes with ease of the patient.

Symptomaticall evacuation of humours raw, and superfluous from the veins,
spleen, liver, as in jaundice, and so voiding with the urine, being in colour
red or yellow, as in the beginning of continual, and intermitting agues.

3. Confused urine is dark, wherein no moats are perceived to swim, or any
other thing without distinction, but the whole urine and every part thereof is
all alike; neither by standing settles any residence, or other thing to the
bottom, whereby it may wax clearer; and so continues without alteration:
yea, though it be chafed at the fire, and in warm water, and is like to wine
which is changed and become dead with thunder, or with age is waxed sour or
tart, without clearness and brightness, and this never rises of diseases in
the reins, nor only of the inner parts, but always comes from diseases of
the veins, neither doth it signify abundance of raw humours, but properly
confusion, putrefaction, and corruption, and that remediless ( malignam) of
the blood and humours in the greater veins: for putrefaction doth confound and
shuffle all things together: wherefore it is found only in continual,
dangerous, and maligne agues. By these I would have you to understand that such
urine (although it be not polluted with unclean reins) doth not always show
the state of the blood and humours. For oftentimes it is yellow, thick, and
troubled, and yet the blood coming out of the veins by blood-letting is
perfectly pure, and red, as it often chances in a quartain and tertian
intermitting, as also in the jaundice, when superfluous choler doth ishue out
of the liver, and gall, and other places, and falls into the veins, and is
not mixed with the blood, but only with the urine: whereupon they are greatly
deceived, which in thick and red urine do presently command blood-letting, as
also it happens many times, that the urine in colour, substance, and sediment
is natural, and yet blood let out is faulty, both in colour and substance:
such as are for the most part in the state, vigour, and before the critic day
of continual agues, when the urines are perfectly concocted, but the humour
offending not at all, moved and voided. Fernel. 451. 452.

CHAP. IV.
Of colours of Vrines.
COlours of urines are 21. which argue and show crudity and concoction.

Crudity, both dark white, as milk white ( Lacteus) as white of milk
Horne-white, Glaucus, as the clear part of a lantern horne, Gray, Charopus,
blandus color, like the white part of a mans nail next the joint. But Galen
saith, Charoppus is like the colour of Lyons eyes.

And light white, Crystalline, Chrystallinus. Snowy, Niveus. Watery, Aqueus.

Concoction, but little or somewhat lacking, yet more then the former colours,
pale, subpiceus, subpalidus, flaxen, spiceus.

Perfect and absolute, best, palew, or partly saffron, subrufus, subaureus,
subsulvus. Lighter then crown gold, yellow as pure gold, Aureus. Actuar,
Fulvus, rufus, Citrinus.

All degrees of colours following after yellow, do signify heate. Sal. page.
88. ex Avicon.

Exceeding the perfect and absolute concoction in these degrees in heate.
Salvian. 88.

1. Light saffron ( subcroceus, subflavus) like water wherein bastard saffron
is dissolved.

Saffron ( flavus, croceus) like to water wherein the flower of saffron is
dissolved.

2. Claret ( subrubeus, palmeus) like to bole armoniake.

Red ( rubeus, puniceus) as red blood, cherries, red apples, saffron it self.

3. Crimson ( purpureus vineus) like blackish red wine, liver colour, water
wherein flesh new killed hath been washed.

Purple ( passeus, cyaneus) of the colour of raisons of the sun, cherries
waxing black, like wine boiled, Salvian. 81.

Blew ( venetus, fuscus, caeruleus, brunus, blavus) half white and half
black mixed.

4. Green ( viridis, porracius, prassinus) as leek leaves, emeraude,
coole-wort.

Oily green ( oleaceus) popinjay green.

Ash colour, colour of lead ( lividus plumbeus.)

Black ( niger.)

In colours of urines we must always consider whether better succeed worse or
contrary, that so we may know the working of nature.

CHAP. V.
Of substance and colour jointly together.
Thin substance, joined with colour white, privately without mixture of
humours, as Snowe-water, or Crystal signifies either crudity, obstruction or
conversion of the humour.

Crudity.
Crudity through decay of natural heate, and then the urine is made freely
without pain, which comes either by ( Salv. 75.) Resolution of cause
external, great hunger, long fasting, or watching, great exercise or labour,
which if they be all moderate the urine is all more coloured and thicker, vid.
cap. 1. under kind of life. So in old men which by age are melancholic, and
other cold conditions of the body. Argent. 25. some large evacuation Swooning*
Weck*

Or of cause internal, as the ill quality of the humour offending, maligne and
pestilent with other evil signs. Or else unnatural heate overcoming the
natural heate, as flesh seething in a pot, being set in the sun is less
boiled* the heate of the sun drawing out the heate of the water.

Such heate is in the whole body, in the beginning of diseases, especially
agues, when unnatural heate prevailing, the humours are raw and not concoct,
and as in a consumption and lingering ague, the moisture of the body is resolved
and moulten, which makes the urine white, Aegid.

And in the reins and vessels of urine, as in the pissing evil ( Diabetes)
when through unnatural heate and strength of the attractive faculty of the
reins, urine is drawn too fast from the liver and stomach before it can
receive any substance and colour: and the retentive and digestive faculties of
the reins, being feeble, and the expulsive strong, the urine is presently
voided often and much; whereupon follows great thirst* heate in the reins,
wasting of the body, costivenesse, and if the grief continue, death. Aegid.

Crudity through suffocation
Or suffocation, and that either of cause external, as eating or drinking
immoderately, surfeiting, quaffing, liberal feeding, small exercise, urine
made shortly after meat and drink received, especially much, or diuretike,
whereby the urine is made before it be concocted in great and large quantity,
without substance or colour.

Or of cause internal, as multitude of humours offending nature, smoothering
and choking the natural heate, as too much oil extinguishing the Lamp, and
too great quantity of green wood the fire, as in all humorall diseases before
concoction appears, urine is white and thin, but after as the matter is
concoct, and heate increases, urines vary. Wecker, such as appear in great
cruditie of cold in children, a mortal sign. Salvian. 24.

Not a good sign in declination of a disease, both for the substance and
colour, but either shows conversion of the humour another way, or relapse and
reciduation, except the urine was made before in great quantity, for so it is a
good sign. 31. Holler.

Dropsy of cold distemperature of the liver at the beginning, for afterward
the matter increasing, the urine waxes thicker.

Apoplexy.

Falling evil with leadish dark, and diverse colour.

Swimming in the head with a certain greenish colour.

Palsies.

Diseases of phlegm, want of appetite.

Diseases of melancholy of his cold, and dry quality, but being voided in
substance thick and black. Aegid. 37.

Gout with little moats in the sediment.

Diseases of the mother, whereunto women's cold constitutions are subject.

Obstruction of some parts of the body, Obstruction.
in, near, or about the passage of urine; as the liver, reins, water,
conduits, the urine made with pain and little in quantity. Such obstruction
arises of melancholy, raw, gross, and indigested, descending to the conduits
of urine, as in a quartain with certain rods or lines in it, and the spleen
distent with melancholy makes the passages of urine straight. Aegid.

Phlegm gross and glassy, descending to the water conduits, as in women
flowers stopped, and regurgitating to the vessels of urine, with skales or
black dust in the sediment, but sometimes blackish, and a red purulent matter.

Choler mixed with grossy and clammy moisture, whereby it cannot ishue out with
the urine, as in the jaundice sometimes.

Sand, gravel, as in the stone of the reins and bladder, partly stopping the
passages, as also receiving nourishment, and increased of tough, viscous slime,
which otherwise would ishue with the urine, and make it thicker.

Slimy matter, as in the strangury.

Tumors, impostumes, growing either in the liver, or betwixt the reins and the
bladder, or in places near to the passages of urine, whereby they are made
straighter.

Colicke or Iliate, the wind distending the guts, and straitning the reins
obstructing them, and continuing above seven days is mortal.

Coversion of the humours.
Conversion of the humour which should give substance and colour another way, and
so the vessels of urine are more destitute of heate and humour, as to the brain
in frenzies mortal, except there be other good signs. Argent. 30.

To impostumes under the short ribs, arme-holes in the neck, about the privy
parts.

To the spleen inflamed in ill sign. Weck.

To other parts of the body as before in thin urine. See there.

In all these, if more coloured urines went before, and ceasing too suddenly
and no evacuation succeeded. Arg. 87. Actuar.

Milk white.
Milk white hath the same signification as was before of snow-water, seeing
they differ not in kind but in degree, but here is less hurt, by reason of
better colour and tincture.

Health in sharp diseases, if the colour of gold went before.

Death, consumption of the lungs, if the colour of gold went not before, and
accompanied with other bad signs.

Pale flaxen
Pale flaxen, the beginning of concoction.

Exulceration of the lungs and consumption if it be little, and have leadish
oily pale we; which is mortal with a laske.

Flegmaticke complexion in a young man being often made in thickish substance.

Palew, yellow, citrine
Palew, yellow, citrine, in whole men perfect health, and if the sediment be
good in young men, by comparison of this all other are to be judged.

Flegmaticke complexion if the substance be some what thick.

In sick men, hot and sharp diseases imminent.

In old men as a double tertian.

In children as a quotidian.

In young men flegmaticke, melancholic or crude contents if they continue long
so, because their urine should naturally be more remiss for abundance of
moisture.

Diseases of the breast, the region full of bubbles.

Of the spleen, when many rods or strikes appear like meteors.

Of the liver if it be much in quantity, the body lean, the belly bound.

Light saffro, saffron.
Light saffron, saffron, of cause external, much watching, great labour and
travel, especially in the heate of the Sun, simple distemperature of heate
without mixture of humours, if it be pure and perspicuous, medicines purging
choler, as Rheubarb, also saffron, cinnamon, broth of cherries.

Of cause internal, as choler abounding as in a tertian.

Distemperature of humours, especially blood if it be thickish dark.

Melancholic complexion in thick substance, and choleric in thin.

End of a sickness being made on the critical day.

Blew, melancholy.

Vrines yellow, saffron, red, do signify exceeding heate of simple
distemperature, if they be pure and perspicuous, but mixture of humour withal,
if they be thick and troubled, Fer. 447.

Thick substance.
Thick substance joined with colour.

White.
White positively with mixture of humours, betokens abundance of raw humours,
phlegm, glassy, salt, unsavoury.

Consumption in a wasting ague, so the fatty nourishment of the body, is molten
and voided.

Impostumes breaking out, as in grievous agues, so rotten matter is voided,
settling to the bottom and stinking, Salvian. 77.

End of an ague, if blood issue out of the nose, and being made on the
judicial day in great quantity, and then no impostume follows.

Milk white.
Milk white like water wherein a little meal is cast, is good in the end of
an ague, and rather if great quantity of urine was made before, B. Holler.

Matter of the stone voided out of the reins and bladder, look more in the
sediment in raw humours and matter of a sore.

An ulcer in the instruments of urine, if it be thick like a mushrone, and
mattery, stinking and falling to the sediment; separation of raw and flegmie
matter without corruption or stench.

Flux of seed in a man or woman, carnal copulation if it be without corruption
and stinks not.

Dropsy if the yellow jaundice continue through great crudity in the veins.

Horne white.
Horne-white, like the horne of an old lantern, dark through smoke, or gray,
like the dark colour of an ox liver, not troubled, betokens that the body
is full of gross humours, and flegmatike diseases of the whole body if it be
troubled, which is like a beasts water, and so continuing long, or always, yet
sometimes being chafed at the fire, it clears when it is broken by cold air,
signifies that the veins are full of ill humours, headache through agitation
of humours ascending. If it wax clear above, and cloddereth in the sediment,
if it be much in quantity, then it betokens the end of an ague: if little in
quantity, an ill sign in an ague.

All white urines signify some good, if the patient be strong.

Claret.
Claret, continuing of the diseases, yet without danger, if it hath a sediment
of like colour and substance.

Red like cherries.
Red like cherries, or red apples, of cause external, fore-sheweth that the
loins or reins are beaten and bruised, or some vein near the reins open or
broken, with pain in the place grieved, Actuar. receipt of some purgation of
rheubarbe, c. as page. 4. died with priver, Avicen. which Mont. 19. beleeveth
not.

Internal, wideness, rarity, thinness, or laxity of some veins near the
reins, through which blood issues, and sweateth out in great quantity, and
weakness of body, Actuar. the reins or bladder fretted, until blood comes,
as in the stone, especially after labour, with gravel.

Abundance of blood, as rotten agues especially.

Abundance of choler, as in agues tertion, partly troubled with an unclean and
rough sediment, or semitertian with a leadish colour, and green cloud.

Abundance of heate unnatural, wasting and melting the moisture of the body
into urine made in great quantity, with fat swimming aloft, as in a
consumption.

Urine staying too long in the body, being not provoked to issue either by
sharp quality, which lacks in cold diseases, or by great quantity being
converted another way, and so at length by delay in the body, waxes more
coloured, and concoct: such happens in the palsy, apoplexy, epilepsie,
phtisicke, cramp, mortal, Haff. dropsy mortal, or else the liver through
debility, is not able to separate the blood from the urines, as in hepatica
passione, Salvian. 87. Arg. 38.

Such also happens in the laske, bloody flixe, Argent. 38. mortal, Haff.
cholike, iliake, mortal, Haffurt, pain in the reins, or else to the place
grieved, blood and heate are drawn, or else choler not descending through the
passage betwixt the liver, and the guts being obstructed with phlegm, and
wind, issues with the urine, Aegid. 11.

Agues decaying, Fer.

Obstructions, inflammations scirrous tumors of the gall (being the natural
receptacle of choler) obstructed, the choler issues at other parts, or else
that portion of choler, which should be voided by stool, is here voided by
urine, Argent. 37. as in the jaundise, with pain in the neck and short ribs,
and will colour a linen cloth put into it.

Of the spleen, and liver, as in the dropsy, so choler goes to the urine.

Relapse, or recidivation of the disease, if it be made thick, and straight
after thin, before and after, the critical day, because the heate which did at
the first expel the disease now is overcome.

In young men without danger, with a good sediment through length of the
disease, but in old men death, not able to detain the blood, Actuar.

Crimson.
Chrimson betokens great labour and travel in whole men, especially in the
heate of the Sun or the fire, c. whereby the blood is inflamed and roasted, so
in an ague.

Burning ague with thirst, watchings, cough, and other accidents of an ague,
Actuar. Adustion of choler and turning into melancholy, yet not so ill if there
be a good sediment: but ill, if the contents be ill or none at all, and the
urine thick, and gross like a cloud.

Purple.
Purple betokens the yellow jaundice if it continue long, if there be signs
of concoction, it betokens health because the cause of the grief is voided.
Affection of the reins only after Fer. and not of weakness of the liver,
whether the urine be red, bloody, or crimson, and like to the washing of raw
flesh, which Reus. mislikes.

Abundance of blood sometimes in young men, with some heaviness or weight
about the liver, and up to the channel bone, or neck bone, and here it is not
a very evil sign, but in old men very evil, yea often mortal, because they
are not able through debility to detain the blood.

Blew.
Blew, beating, bruising, stripes, where it is a good sign, because the humour
is voided. But Vasseus was deceived by a woman, mixing an ox gall, Reusnerus.

Extreme cold, and mortification, extinction of natural heate, if the
strength be weak, and no signs of concoction besides.

Great exercise, and labour, great heate, and rosting of the blood.

Melancholy arising of a dust colour.

Changing of the bladder from his natural disposition in old men.

Strangury at hand in those that have the stone.

Recovery and health where the patient is mending in declination of the
disease, or being made on the critical day.

Green alone.
Green or rather greenish, Argent. alone seldom of good hope, Mont.

Cold, extreme, mortal: if leadish colour and black follow successively at
divers times, pulse feeble, in thirst, or short breath, Cappiv. 147. contrary
to Reusn. 136.

Quotidian ague, melancholy a dust, yellow jaundice especially with an ague.

Heate and adustion of humours a long time: if green hath black immediately
succeeding, and not leadish coming between, and accompanied with great heate
in the body, thirst, ague, short breath, and some splendent glistering in the
urine.

Green oily
Oily, not such wherein fat like spiders webs float, but such whose substance
is clammy and thick, as oil or fat molten, and being shaken is clammy and
heavy as oil, Fernel.

Good, if it be made only after black urine, as better succeeding the worse.

Made on the critical day, in great quantity, for so the matter is voided.

After pain of the reins without an ague, especially appearing suddenly with
great quantity.

Dropsy, vehement cholike. This urine Galen hath often seen without any great
hurt following, Cappiv. 92.

Ill, in a consumption of the body remediless through great imbecility of the
parts of the body rising of great distemperature of heate, that they cannot
contain nourishment, which voiding, doth give this colour to the urine.
Reusner.

And in consumption of the lungs.

Tertian ague in fat and soft tender bodies, Argent.

Convulsion of dryness, madness, vomiting continual thirst, heate, the
tongue scorched, c. going before, yet if better colours follow, better hope,
Actua.

Ash colour
Ash colour leadish, good in beating, bruisings, if it settle to the sediment,
in black jaundice, because the cause of the grief is evacuated. Ill, extreme
and mortal heate in hot agues, if green colour was made before at other times.
Contra Cappivac. 145. Especially without sediment and other signs of heate.

Mortal, strangury, following in a burning ague.

Extreme and mortifying cold, if the colour before was pale and other signs of
cold, Cappivac. 149.

The same judgement is of blew colour, but that here all things are greater and
augmented.

Black.
Thick substance with colour black, of cause either external or internal.

External, eating of Cassia, Argent. 40. c. as before page. 4. cap. 1.

Fall, bruisings, beatings, purgers of melancholy.

Internal by mixture of some humour, as melancholy, blood adust, or choler
adust, Mont. 17.

Critical evacuation with ease of the patient after great diseases.

Quartain declining or rather burning ague, long or sharp diseases with
bleeding at the nose and sweat on the critical day, else death, Actua.
Child-birth, or with child, Cap. 151.

Women's flowers heretofore stopped, and now voided if white or such like went
before.

Splenetike diseases with a tumor in the spleen.

Chronicall diseases of the back and matrix of melancholy.

Melancholy, black jaundise, Wecker.

Madness, fury, hemmoraudes.

Reins and bladder troubled with the stone, with stincke, by breaking some
little veins in the reins.

Other griefs of gross humours, but if there be great heate, pain, ague, want
of appetite, a posy, some dangerous canker, carbuncle, or naughty ulcers, Sal.
97.

Symptomaticall extreme and mortal, heate and adustion, as in sharp agues, if
green urine went before or red, with heate, leanness and thirst, stink of
the urine and small quantity, Cappiv. 111. 161. 169. Fern. Actuar. which may
cause a dangerous cramp or convulsion after great labour, except it be made on
the critical day.

Cold, if blew, green, or ash colour urine made before, with cold, and without
stench a little sediment, and united, Cappiv. 146. Selv. 94. but in this case
the urine is rather dark then black indeed, Mont. vide mercurial. varia.
lect. lib. 2. cap. 11.

Black urines are mortal in all ages and persons, unless they come of some
cause external, or critical evacuations, Salv. 93. 96. Cap. 157.

A general note.
There be four elementary qualities, whereof two be called active, and two
passive: the active be heate, and cold, and these give colour unto the urine:
for heate makes the urine red and tinct with high colours (which by moistness
are obscured and darkened, by dryness quickened made far more lightsome:) and
cold makes the colour of the water more remiss, as white and such like.

Now the two passive qualities, are moistness and dryness, which cause
substance in urines: whereof moistness thickneth the urine, dulls the
colour, and augments the quantity: dryness clarifies and ratifieth it, and
that either by diminishing the quantity, contents, and substance, or by
increasing the thinness, clearness, and brightness thereof, with mean
colour and grosser sediment.

CHAP. VI
Of the quantity of Urine.
Much quantity.
QVantity of urine. Much of cause external and internal.

External, moist, and rainy weather, and all things increasing moisture in the
body, as sleep, idleness, want of exercise, moist meates, or broaths, or
other things which do moisten the body.

Long and much drinking and quaffing of wine, water, color white, substance
thin, Salv. 106.

Medicines diuretike which provoke urine, break the stone, or make the urine
sharp and salt.

For by their heate they draw much urine, and by subtilty of their parts they
attenuate gross humours for expulsion* the sediment being slender and
glistering Actua. Salv. 101.

Internal evacuation, critical or symptomaticall.

Critical, by strength of nature, ease of the patient, and other signs of
concoction as in dropsy, anasarca, or great crudity, repletion of humours, when
the humour hath been long shut up in a place and now finds issue, Weck. Fern.
so abundance of raw humours made thinner are voided by urine as Fernelius
observed, a drunkard, gross, fat, and well liking in 8. days space by
continual evacuation became slender and lean without any sickness at all.

Other diseases colour, whither, substance thinner, sediment mean, and where
thick urine went before, else not good except nature be strong, so in diseases
declining. Record.

Symptomaticall, through weakness of nature without ease of the patient, and
other signs of crudity, as when the retentive faculty is decayed in dangerous
diseases, or nature is wearied, dissolveth humours and voideth them suddenly by
sweat, stool, or urine, Actua. 116. as in laskes, flixes, want of appetite,
chronicall diseases, convulsion of heate and dryness in sharp agues.

Consumption of the whole body somewhat fatty, in colour palew, reddish, high
coloured, without signs of concoction, for so the profitable fat, moisture,
humours, and substantial parts of the body are molten, dissolved, and voided by
urine. Sal. 109. Fern. 445.

Cause internal, heate of the liver drawing abundance of juice from the
stomach too fast, and not able to digest it.

Heat of the reins drawing the urine too fast from the liver and emulgent
veins, speedily expelling it as in the pissing ill, colour white, substance
thin, sediment lacking, Actua.

Cold of the stomach breeding waterish juice, and sending it to the liver, for
error in the first concoction is not taken away in the second.

Cold of the liver not able to convert the profitable juice into nourishment,
as in all habit of the body, dropsy, anasarca, the urine waterish with raw and
diverse sediment, Bl. Hollerius.

Other excrements not evacuated either by stool, colour mean sediment thicker
and greater. Actuar. or by sweat, or by pores of the skin, by insensible
perspiration, c. so the moist and thin parts are voided more abundantly by
urine, so Arist. 4. de gener. animal. 4. reports a cow (whose paunch-hole
being shut up) had her excrements turned into wind and urine, Salv. 111.

Little quantity.
Little of cause external or internal.

External, as dry meats, colour palew, sediment small and thicker.

Little drinking, tart, stipticke, thick, or drying drink.

Much sweat, vehement exercise, or other things whereby the moisture of the
body is dried and made less.

Internal, vessels of urine stopped or obstructed by inflammation of the water
conduits and neck of the bladder, tumor or swelling, tough, grossy, and clammy
meates, as in the strangury, medicines, humours flegmaticke, stone, see gravel
in the sediment, with pain and grief about the place affected. Dolor ostendit
locum, see suppression of urine.

Vessels of urine hurt or weakened by old age, palsy, ill distemperature, or
some instrumental diseases of the parts whereby the urine cannot be
attracted, receireceived, expelled, Salv. 113.

Internal cause, as translation of the urine another way, as to the belly,
feet, and nether parts in the dropsy.

To the guts in laskes, flixes, purgations sediment little, substance thin,
color white and waterish, cap. 12.

To the Hemeraudes, menstruall evacuation of the flowers.

To the pores of the skin in sweat and in sensible perspiration.

Cods in the rupture, Hydrocele.

To the whole body, in the small pocks, measils, impostumes, see thin
substance. And in recovery of health after sickness, so moisture is turned
into nourishment of the body, Fer.

Internal causes, sharp burning agues wasting the moisture of the body, colour
tending to black, Cappivac. 111.

Consumption of the body of long continuance whereby the moisture is dried, as
in sharp agues, consumption of the lungs, c.

Mean quantity.
Mean, proportionable to the drink received the same day, and other days
before, or somewhat less, because some is spent in the body, Health.

CHAP. VII.
Of the signification of the contents of the Urine in general.
COntents are, whatsoever is to be seen in the urine beside colour, substance,
quantity, perspecuity, and darkness, and they occupy sometime the top of the
urine, as spume, bubbles, circle, sometime the highest part, or region (the
whole urine according to his height being divided into three equal parts,
which are commonly called regions) as the cloud ( nubes.) sometime the middle
region, as the sublation, or swim: and lastly sometime, and that most often,
the lowest region, or sediment; as gravel, blood, seed, dust, c. as hereafter
follow.

Contents are sometime lacking in the urine, and sometimes present.

Contents wanting for five causes.
Contents want in the urine for five causes. 1. For want of matter, which
should make the contents. As in great exercises, sweat, insensible
perspiration, hunger, fasting, laskes, purgations, either by vomit, or stool,
emerauds, flowers, c. also in meats which increase choler, or choleric
diseases.

2. Corruption of the matter, and humours in the body, whereby comes neither
nourishment nor excrement, Actuar.

3. Crudity, and lack of concoction in whole men, by much quaffing, or thin,
small drink, or by diuretike potions, which provoke urine. Also pissing
shortly after drinking, before it receive any concoction, or mixture with meat,
whereof contents come. In sick men, in whom, though humours do abound, yet
they do not issue with the urine, but lurk in the veins, overloading nature,
as in chronicall diseases. Also in sharp agues in their beginning, or
increasing great weakness of nature, not able to expel the contents. And
indeed in all humorall diseases beginning, and increasing the contents are none
at all, or little, because nature as yet hath made no concoction, or
separation, and in the state of the disease commonly contents are very few. But
in declination, nature recovering her self, and prevailing against the
disease, the contents, cloud, swim, and sediment also return, except in
choleric diseases, where the cloud is sufficient, Cappivac. 67. 67. Also in
deficient agues beginning, the contents want, as in a tertian, in thick
substance, and yellow colour: but if ash colour, death follows. In a quartain
the urine is thin, and white. In a quotidian, thin, white, and waterish.

4. Conversion of the humour another way, as, in impostumes, in cold weather,
weak bodies, and injudicable state of the disease. In inflammations, which draw
the contents and humours to them. In parts weak, or grieved whether humours
fall, as before in thin urine. Look there cap. 2 page. 13. 14.

5. Obstruction in white, and thin urines with signs of concoction, or without
crudity. See cap. 2. page. 13. 14.

Less to be dispraised, if the colour and substance be good, according to
which, the humour abounding, strength of nature, and quantity of the disease are
to be judged, as before in substance and colour, Actua. 94. But diseases of
choler are ended if the cloud only appear. But in flegmatike, and of
repletion the sediment present must argue their dissolution, Capiv. 67. 164.

Contents sometimes good and sometimes ill.
Contents appearing in the urine are of two sorts: for they are either partly
natural, partly unnatural, sometimes good and sometimes ill. Or else, they be
altogether unnatural, and always ill.

In contents which are partly natural, partly unnatural, we consider (as in
the whole urine before) colour, substance, and quantity.

Colour of the Contents.
White.
White duly knit, or hanging together equally, signifies good concoction in
the liver, and veins, health, rule of all other.

Not equally knit, but thicker in one part then in another, signifies weak
digestion, crudity, windinesse.

White not duly knit or hanging together, but ragged, tattered and broken
asunder equally, crudity, windinesse. Not equally, but thinner in one place
then in another, signifies the falling evil, windinesse, gross humours
abounding in the body, measils, or small pockes, where the colour waxes red.

White as snow; signifies flegmaticke humours and crudities.

Pale.
Pale, flaxen, blood turned into choler and evacuated.

Saffro, c.
Light saffron, saffron, red, claret, signify crudities, also blood thin and
waterish, yet wherein concoction is to be looked for shortly. Also choler
abounding in sick persons, Reusn. 178. Continuance in tertian and quotidian
agues especially bastard. A good sign in agues, which rise of abundance either
of blood or ill humours, in which the sediment is necessary before recovery can
be looked for. But in agues caused through heate of the Sun, much labour, or
hunger, the swim or cloud is sufficient to signify recovery of health,
although the sediment doth not appear. For reddish look substance following.

Bloody.
Blood, like to the washing of raw flesh, signifies abundance of blood. Or
else flux of blood issuing out, as out of some vein broken. But yet we must
not be hasty in judgement by this colour, but rather look after under the
title of pure blood voided, Reusn. 181. Also it signifies imbecility, or
obstruction of the liver, which cannot concoct the blood, and so it runs to
the bladder.

Blew.
Blew, leadish, signifies natural heate extinguished or mortified, and
therefore great danger.

Green
Green blackish signifies great exceeding heate, or consumption and pining
away.

Black.
Black signifies either great cold, if leadish colour went before, and then
the outward parts are cold, Salvian. 128. or great heate if green colour went
before, and then heate, thirst, and other tokens of heate accompany it. Both
these are mortal, as you may see in thick substance and black colour.

Or else black contents signify melancholic diseases, or melancholy,
critically evacuated: where it is a good sign of health because the humour is
voided.

If signifies also consumption of the reins with an ague, the sediment oily
and fatty, Reusn. 188.

Lastly, it signifies beating, bruising, stripes, and so come corrupt, black,
and rotten blood is voided.

Substance of the contents is either mean, thick or thin.

Mean.
Substance mean, is a good sign of health, because it is according to nature.

Thick.
Thick contents generally signify gross, and raw humours much abounding* or
imbecility of the second concoction.

And in diseases beginning, and increasing an ill sign, because they signify
abundance, and trouble of humours before natural heate hath concocted, and
attenuated them. But in diseases declining a good sign, if the colour, and
other signs be good, nature being now of strength to make separation, and
expulsion of humours.

Thick contents, and of colour claret, signify abundance of blood, or good
and strong operation in digestion, Reusner. 203. but contents of colour black,
signify great store of blood, and the more black, the greater adestion of
blood, Reusner. 204.

Thin.
Thin contents which do not easily arise, nor trouble the urine, when the
urinal is shaken and moved, Reusner. 186. signify raw humours, or want of
heate in the second concoction in whole men. But in diseases rising of cold, or
ill juice, thin substance, shows great danger. Because natural heate is
choked, and oppressed, that it cannot expel the humour offending.
Contrariwise in sharp diseases, or in diseases which rise of simple and bare
distemperature without mixture of humours. They are not very ill, seeing humours
are not the cause of the disease, which voiding with the urine, should make the
contents thick.

If the sediment lightly arise, the urinal being shaken, it argues more
heate, Vass. 71.

If they continue either thick, or thin, they signify weakness of nature,
which should change them, Argent. 71.

Quantity of contents is either much, little, or mean.
Much.
Much signifies. 1. Lack of sufficient heate to attenuate and concoct the
grosser parts so in winter, drunkards, sleepers, idle persons, women and
children contents are more, Reusn. 64.

2. Much nourishment, good and strong digestion.

3. Other evacuations suppressed, as ordure, sweat, c. and especially in
flegmatike bodies, which are grieved with some disease, which will end well.

Little or few contents. Little.


1. Want of matter, as in hunger, great heate, summer, lusty age, great
exercise, quartain and quotidian agues beginning for want of heate, Argent. 72.
but afterwards much. Contrary in tertians.

2. Obstructions and stoppings of the emulgent veins, water conduits, reins,
bladder, c. Salvia. 120. As in thin urine see there.

3. Crudity and slow concoction.

4. All causes which do attenuate and make thinner any matters in the body,
that so the thinner part may evaporate out, and the grosser stay within, and
make obstruction, also all causes which do wast and consume the body.

Mean.
Mean contents of good signification because they are according to nature.

CHAP. VIII
Of contents in special.
OF deformed contents, altogether unnatural, and always ill; which appear
either in the sediment or lowest region, or in the swim or middle region, or
lastly in the cloud or upper region. And first of unnatural and deformed
contents in the sediment, which are commonly reckoned fifteen.

Popinjay green.
1. Popinjay green or oily sediment signifies.

Colliquation of the whole body, with pain, an ague, and pissed slowly by
little and little: or else collaquation of the reins or bladder only with
pain in the reins, no ague, and pissed fast.

Spider webs.
2. Spider webs or fatness swimming in the urine, signifies

Consumption of the whole body with an ague.

Red vetches.
Red vetches or fitches, ervaceum, orobeum, signify

1. Great inflammation of the liver.

2. Colliquation of the whole body: or of the reins only, with conditions as
before in popinjay green.

4. Plates, scales, ( folium, laminae, squamae) having breadth and length only,
like scales of fishes, especially a gogeon.

Plates, scales.
1. Consumption or colliquation of the whole body, with an ague, slow pissing,
stench, and crudity in the rest. All concurring together.

2. Exulceration of the bladder, pissed thick and fast, with stink, purulent
matter, pain, and concoction, Salvian. 176.

3. Inflammation of the bladder or liver.

5. Gross and course bran, Fursur.

Thin.
1. Consumption of the whole body with crudity and thin urine.

2. Scabbednesse of the whole body, without ague or other pain, Hasfur, or of
the bladder only, with concoction, no ague. And pain of the bladder, thick
and stinking, an itch about the root of the yard, and purulent matter was
pissed before, Salv. 175.

3. Great heate wasting the substance of the liver, and burning the blood, if
the bran be red.

6. Fine bran, fine meal or flower ( simila, Fine meal
pulls, (...).)

1. Colliquation of the solid parts, if they be white.

2. Extreme adustion of the blood, if they be red, and therefore long
sickness, Salvian. 179.

3. Sharp sickness, and for the most part mortal.

4 Women with child have fine meal or starch in the swim, or settling to the
sediment of their urine, like fine carded wool, the rest of the urine a little
troubled, and greenish, or ash colour, Fernel. Look motes in the sediment.

7. Raw humour ( crudus humour) clammy but not stinking like snevill of the nose,
or white of an egg.

Raw humour.
1. Exulceration of the reins and bladder without pain.

2. Impostume or stone of the reins and bladder with pain.

3. Multitude of raw humours sometimes causing an ague, and appearing in the
sediment, signify ache in the reins, sciatica, gout, strangury, tenasmus. In
the swim, crudity and windinesse in the stomach, with a noise, and vomiting.
In the cloud, grief in the spiritual parts, shortness of wind,
pursivenesse, spitting of blood, Hacfur. Aegid.

4. Eating of meats hard to digest, in sore labouring men, Vass. 74, 75.

8. Rotten and purulent matter. Matter of a sore ( pus) stinking, but not much
clammy, which when the urinal is shaken, disperses it self into fatty and
oily resolutions, and signifies,

Rotten matter.
1. Exulceration of the reins without pain, Fernel. of the bladder with pain
about the bladder. Of the liver with pain under the right short ribs, and doth
not always stink liver putrefied, if it be very dreggy, Aegid. 69.

2. Inflammation or impostume of the lungs, whose purulent matter passes by
the left cavity of the heart into the great artery, and thence into the
emulgent veins, and so to the reins.

3. Plurifie, whose matter passes as before. As also by the vein without a
fellow ((...)) rising on the right side of the hollow vein, near the heart
and by the backbone, nourishing eight ribs on either side: and so to the
midriffe, and at length by divers turnings into the left emulgent vein, and
thence to the reine.

4. Rhewme, which if it be thick, coming to the bladder it makes difficulty
in pissing by drops. 5. Also the frenzy. 6. or squinsie, whose purulent
matter of these three is conveyed through the jugular veins into the hollow
vein, and thence into the emulgent veins, and so to the reins, if there be
pain and grief in the lungs, liver, bladder, in these griefs aforesaid,
otherwise if purulent matter be voided, and no pain in these members, it is
certain that nature voideth it rising of inflammations. 7. or venerous and
contagious flux of seed, Fernel.

9. Hairs like pieces of flesh, long, slender, and hairy) poli, carunculae,
filamenta) only in thick urine, Salvian. 182. and signify.

Hairs or filaments.
1. Dissolution of the whole body, with an ague, colour oily or green,
Hasfurt. or of the reins only without an ague, the hairs fatty and gross,
and may be felt betwixt the fingers, like a small, slender, fleshy substance.

2. Obstruction of the reins, with gross and clammy humours, as in the
strangury, dysury, pissing ill, c. with nummednesse of that foot, which is on
the same side the reine is, right left.

3. Exulceration of the reins or bladder, whence comes purulent matter.

4. Flux of seed after carnal copulation, venerous pollutions on the night: or
filthy and exulcerate gonorrhea, Fernel.

5. Women's white flowers issuing, or women having unclean matrices, Fern.

10. Gravel sand, ( Arenula, sabulum) red, white, or duskish browne,
signifies.

Cravell sand.
1. Stone breeding or dissolving either in the reins, if the gravel be red,
(yet sometimes white by filth enclosing the gravel, Fernel.) and pain about
the reins in the back, no ague, and the gravel being taken out of the
urinal and dried in a shadowy place, are hard in touching. Or in the bladder
if the gravel be white and pain in the bladder, about the share where the
hair grows.

Yet those men whose passages of urine are wide and open, and expulsive faculty
strong, and making such sandy urine freely, and without pain, in good
quantity, are seldom troubled with the stone, because their reins and bladder
are hereby cleansed, and the gravel not suffered to stay so long to unite and
gather together to make the stone, but such gravel doth argue great heate of
the liver or reins, and abundance of raw and gross humours fit to breed the
stone, if the passages of urine should be obstructed, or expulsive faculty,
weakened, Salv. For abundance of tough and viscous superfluities, straitness
of passage, and weakness of the expulsive faculty, are three especial causes
of the stone, Aegid.

A profitable history of the stone.
But least the contents mixed with urine, which for the most part come from the
vessels of urine, should deceive him that would rightly judge of other parts of
the body, I will repeat the whole cause, and order of the effects from the
beginning. Red gravel come from the reins, which being many, and thick do
threaten the stone, of those growing together, grows a stone as big as a
grain of millet, or barley corn, which being extruded out of the substance of
the reins, into a larger place, doth make the urine thick, troubled, red, or
blackish, a forerunner of the disease of the reins, the same being thrust into
the head of the water pipe ( ureter) causes great pain, and then the urine is
white and thin as in obstructions, the same growing bigger, is sometimes so
fastened in the reins, that it cannot be removed, and then after great labour
and exercise by fretting of the reins with the stone, the urine is not only
thick, and troubled, but also bloody, and sometime clods of blood settled
down: such urines are sometimes made after a fall, or beating, and seldom
after great labour: when the ulcer is thus made, in rest, and quietness, the
urine is thick, and white: after labour more coloured, with a thick sediment:
after that the urine is thick, white, and stinching, and purulent, not much
unlike milk in which purulent matter settles, when as the ulcer is hollow and
filthy; such urine hinder judgement of all other parts of the body, save the
reins, and when as the ulcer grows very filthy, and comes to a fistula in
this white, thick, troubled, and stinking urine, oftentimes a thick, slimy,
tough matter, like the snevill of the nose, or white of an egg settles, and
such oftentimes issues when the stone is in the bladder, for though the matter
thereof comes from the reins, yet it grows and wraps about the stone
through fault, or weakness of the bladder, which may appear, for that the
urine continues so when the stone is voided: moreover filthy ulcers of the
neck of the bladder, and yard, and flux of seed in the French disease, do
cause such urines: but at the first certain slender filaments appear, then
more gross, whereof the whole urine waxes thick, and lastly this filthy
sediment that now we speak of. And although the ulcer be cured, yet certain
filaments remain through imbecility of the bladder, and spermatike vessels,
Fernel. 455.

2. Adustion of humours. As in diseases of choler, as burning agues, Salvian.
183. tertian agues, single and compound. Also in diseases of melancholy, as
quartain ague long continued. Gout after long drying and thickening of the
humour. Pain of the joints and reins. Leprosy, morbus Gallicus confirmed,
emeraudes* costivenesse, Aegid. Also heate of the liver, if there be no pain
nor heaviness about the reins. A gr^vell note against such sand.
Such sandy gravel floats in the whole body of the urine, like motes in the
Sunnebeames, and after settling to the sediment, covering the bottom of the
urinal, or in colour browne, or duskish red, and cleaves to the sides of the
urinal, and being dried in a shadowy place are somewhat soft and tractable.
Look after for gravel in the swim.

3. Receipt of sharp diuretike medicines which provoke urine, which skouring
the reins, do bring such gravel with them.

Worms.
11. Worms, little dragons. ( vermes, dracunculi.)

1. Putrefaction, whereof they be engendered, Argent.

12. Blood, pure, thick, gross, or cloddy, ( sanguis, grumus sanguinis) when
the vessels of blood and urine have their

Blood, clods of blood.
1. Orifice opened ((...)) whereby blood issues, either because that the blood
exceeds in quantity, as in sanguine men. Or in critical evacuation, though
seldom, so women's flowers voiding by urine are gross and cloddy, settling to
the sediment, and no pain in any part of the body. So in declination of
diseases of the spleen, with much residence and dregs, Hasfurt. Or else when
the blood exceeds in quality, as when it is too thin, sharp, or salt,
tickling the vessels, and provoking them to expulsion. Or else when the vessels
of blood and urine are either too large, wide, and open, as the veins emulgent
carrying the urine from the hollow vein to the reins, being too open, do
receive blood from the hollow vein, Wecker. Or when the said vessels are too
weak in their retentive faculty; as when the veins be too weak, so in the
small pockes ( exanthemata) blood stayed in other places, and overloading
nature, is voided by urine, which if it stink, and the pocks be blew or
leadish, mortal. Or the liver too weak, so pure blood is voided by stool, or
urine, as the hollow or round part of the liver is affected, with pain under
the right short ribs, and stinks not. Has. or the hollow vein too weak, so
pure blood is voided with pain about the seventh joint in the back, from os
sacrum upward. Aegid. Or lastly, the reins and bladder too weak and feeble,
as in old men at the pits brink.

2. Membranes or tunicles of the veins, laxe, thin, and full of pores, so
thin, watery, and warm blood running between the skin and the flesh,
sweating out ((...)) in process of time gathers together into black and
leadish clods.

3. Substance and membranes hurt ((...)) by a fall, beating, bruising, leaping,
violent exercise, great burdens, so cloddy blood voideth. Or by medicines,
which are corrosives and caustickes or openers of obstructions, or by the stone
in the reins or bladder after exercise: so the reins or bladder being wounded
and exulcerated, filthy and cloddy blood voydeth with stink and pain about
the places grieved. Dolor ostendit locum. Record.

If blood issue by any of these ways in the vessels of the lungs, breast,
arteries, stomach, belly, or guts, there follows vomiting of blood; but in
other parts by the two first ways, it gathers into clods. Ianus Cornarius in
Gal. lib. (...), 74.

13. Seed ( sperma, semen) which lightly floats and ascends, the urinal
being shaken. And issues with the urine either for that the

Seed.
1. Seed abounds in quantity, as after carnal copulation, desire of carnal
copulation, or venerous dreams, c. Or when the seed in quality is either too
sharp, hot, or salt, then the yard is extended, and issues with some delight
in good quantity, and stinks, Wecker in gonorrhaea. Or when the seed is too
thin or waterish, which issues without sense almost and unwillingly, the yard
not extent, and then the whole body waxes lean, especially the loins. Or
lastly, when the seed is virulent and contagious, as in morbo gallico, with
stench of the urine, and sometime gravelly or sandy contents.

2. Vessels spermatike are either too slippery; or else weak in their
retentive faculty, with wasting of the whole body, as in Apoplexy, palsy in
the genitours, falling sickness. For in these diseases, stool, urine, feed,
c. are involuntary.

Dust.
14. Dust, ( cineres) black or leadish and heavy, like a black powder rising
of melancholy, and signifies,

1. Flux of the emeraudes present or shortly to follow, the colour of the
urine remiss. And sometime vomiting of blood.

2. Pain and diseases of the spleen, especially after purging of melancholy.
The dust being somewhat browne or purple.

3. Stopping of the flowers. In substance, thick, colour pale, flaxen, or
white, sediment little or lacking. And sometime vomiting of blood, and the dust
gathered and heaped together in the sediment or bottom.

4. Pain in the reins, loins, and other inferior parts, by which the
melancholic blood passes in the hemorrhoidall veins to the seat.

15. Motes ( Atomi) such as appear in the Sunne-beames, little and round, red
or white, little flocks. And these appearing in the urine signify,

1. Putrefaction as in the plague, Motes.
morbus gallicus, with stench.

2. Great agitation and commotion of the humours, as in the small pockes and
measils.

In these two the motes flote all over the urine yet warm, and during t^e
natural heate thereof; and after settling to the sediment, do signify a
doubtful strife betwixt nature and the disease, to be decided by age, strength
of the patient, and other signs, Montan. 50.

3. Rhewme in the whole body, if the said motes do appear in the whole urine.
Or in the superior parts of the body only, if they appear only in the upper
region of the urine. Or in the middle parts of the body, if they appear in the
middle region. Or lastly, the lowest part of the body, if they appear only in
the lowest region or sediment of the urine, the motes are rough and the urine
troubled.

4. Gout with conditions, as before in rhewme.

5. Diseases of the mother.

6. Conception in women, settling down to the sediment, which if they be red,
through greater abundance of heate and blood, a male child is conceived. If
white through less abundance of heate and blood, a female is conceived.

More signs of Conception.
Because Physicians vary in judgement, what urines do signify conception (yea
Io. le. Bon. in his treatise de therapeia puerpurarum. Forestus in his book de
incerto falaci urinarum iudicio, lib. 2. cap. 3. and divers others, do deny
that any certain judgement thereof can be gathered by urine.) I thought good
therefore not only to set down their several opinions thereof by urine, but
also add more signs besides urine. Both generally of conception, and specially
whether it be of male or female.

Signs of conception by urine.
Divers opinions about women's conception.
1. Generally women's urine with child is less concoct, white, thin, with a
little sediment, yet the nearer they draw to childebirth, it waxes more
coloured.

2. Some say there appears in the urine, like fine flower or starch, which
after the urine is settled, hath a sedimentor swim somewhat thick, like fine
carded wool, and the rest of the urine troubled, and somewhat green or black.

3. Other hold that their urine is white with a cloud, swimming aloft, and many
motes floating in the whole urine, such as are in the Sunne-beames and
especially in the first month; and when the urinal is shaken or moved they
depart asunder, like carded wool. In the months following, the urine is red
or yellow, and at length black, with a red cloud swimming aloft.

4. Other some take their judgement by the sediment only, which they affirm is
like cotton or fine carded wool; or raw silk. Reusner thinks that they be
little flocks or motes, c. as before in motes.

Other signs of conception, besides the urine.
1. The terms are stayed without grief after they have issued eight or ten
days after copulation.

2. They feel a wringing, beating, and moderate pain about their navill,
womb, loins, stomach, back, and thighs.

3. Their appetite to meat somewhat decays, yet longs after strange things
which affection is called Citta or pica, Aegid. 74.

4. They have sometime bitter belchings, vomitings, hardness of the paps, and
redness of the teates, swelling of the veins and arteries, especially within
the nose and eyes, pain, or swimming in the head, dimness of sight, red
pimples in the face, costivenesse, no desire of copulation, though before they
had great delight.

5. If a very clean needle be put into a woman's urine with child in a brazen
basin all night, and on the morrow be coloured and died with red spots, she
hath conceived: but if it be black and rusty, she hath not.

6. If after supper going to bed, she drink water and honey sodden together (
Hydromel) and feel a wringing in her guts she hath conceived, else not,
Hippoc. 5. Aphoris. 57.

Special signs of conception whether it be of male or female.
Whether male or female.
1. Motes in the sediment red and round, signify a male: but motes white and
round, a female.

2. Milk (in conception of male) comes sooner into her breasts, which being
milked, and set in a glass in the Sun, it waxes hard into a stone, not
unlike a bright pearl.

3. All her right side is better and more lusty then her left, right eye
fairer, right pap greater with milk, the pulse of her right artery swifter.

If milk be cast upon the woman's water with child, it will sink to the
bottom, neither will it depart asunder, though salt be cast in.

4. If a woman's urine be kept three days in a glass bottle stopped, and after
strain it through a fine, clean linen cloth, if there appear, little quick
living creatures, and red, a male is conceived, if white a female.

6. Terms flow after the fourteenth day, and the child is felt to stir,
and move after the fifty day. To be short, all things are more quick, lusty,
and strong in the male, then in the female, Reusn.

And to be short, because the seed of the male is hotter and livelier then of
the female, therefore all things in the male are sooner performed, as the male
receives all the lineaments of his body, and perfect shape of a man in his
mothers womb in thirty days: the female in forty. The male begins to
stir in the womb in three months: the female in four. The male is borne
and comes forth of the womb in nine months, the female in ten. And the
mother her self after birth of a male, hath forty days assigned for her
purification; but after the birth of a female, fourscore days, Levit. 12. 4,
5. And that men are hotter in constitution then women, may easily appear in
that they have fewer excrements, larger veins, blacker colour, greater and
lustier members, greater voice, more audacity and courage then women, Bertinus.

Contents in the middle region of the urine.
Contents in the middle region or swim
The middle region of the urine, sublation, or swim, ((...)) is the middle
distance of the urine divided into three equal parts: and here, (as before in
contents in general, and in the sediment in special) are considered.

Colour, substance, quantity, contents, c. All which have the same
signification for the most part, as before in the sediment, save in these six
differences following.

1. Contents in the swim, signify some windinesse, whereby they are elevated
so high.

2. Good contents in the swim, which signify health (as white, saffron,
claret, light, and equal) are not so good as in the sediment, yet in agues of
choler, heate of the Sun, hunger, labour, anger, c. Presence of the swim,
is a sufficient sign of health, but of phlegm or melancholy, (which are not so
soon concocted) the presence of the sediment is necessary before there can be
any security of recovery, Cappivaccius, 67.

3. Ill contents in the swim, which are signs of sickness, as black,
green, leadish, solide, and deformed contents, are not so ill, as in the
sediment, Cappivac. 171.

4. Contents in the swim give signification of the affections and diseases in
the middle parts of mans body, as about the short ribs, hypocondria, inward
entrails, as the spleen, liver, heart, lungs, bowels, c. viscera, breast,
stomach. Was. 81. As also contents in the cloud, signify diseases of the
highest part of mans body, and the sediment of the lowest parts. Yet divers
mislike this application of the three regions of the urine, to the three parts
of mans body, Aegid.

5. Sand or gravel, (not in the sediment, but in the swim) in colour
reddish, and sticking to the sides of the urinal, as though the urine should
thicken, or congeal into stones, signifies Adustion of the liver, Was. 90.

6. Motes ( Atomi) floating through the whole urine, and being elevated and
puffed up by unnatural and flatuous heate, and after it be cold, settling to
the sediment, or troubling the urine, signifies a great strife in the veins,
betwixt natural heate and the disease, to be determined by age, strength,
diet, complexion, and good order of the patient, Mont. 50.

Of the cloud or uppermost region of the Urine.
Cloud.
The highest or uppermost region of the urine (being as I said before divided
according to his height, into three equal parts) is called the cloud ( nubes,
(...)) wherein we consider (as in the two former regions, substance, quantity,
colour, contents, c. which have the same signification as before: save that
contents here in the cloud, compared with other regions, have least
signification of good, in good signs: and contrary, least signification of
ill, in ill signs.

Colours of the Cloud.
White. White.

1. Not of very evil signification, because all contents are naturally white.
2. In perfect tertian agues abundance of choler, and so continuance of the
disease. 3. In rotten agues ( synochus) great danger through pain and grief in
the fore-part of the belly about the short ribs, Reusner. 236.
Red. Red.

1. Changing of the sickness into a quartain. 2. Concoction of humours,
beginning to be on the seventh day or critical day, if this red colour appear
on the fourth day or judicial day. 3. Head-ache, through wind and flatuous
spirits ascending up into the head, and so continuance of the disease.
Black. Black.
Long watchings, and lack of sleep whereof follows the lightness of the
brain, raving, doting, which in old men is mortal.

Deformed contents in the cloud.
Deformed contents of the cloud are of three sorts, according to the places
which they occupy, for 1. either they appear in the whole region of the cloud.
2. or occupy only the edge, ring or circle round about the urine. 3. or lastly
they slote all over the top of the urine. And to begin with the first.

Deformed contents appearing in the whole region of the cloud are three.
White cloud.
1. Little white cloud ( nebula) signifies phlegmatic matter to be elevated by
strong heate, and for the most part, a good sign and signification of
concoction, and which will shortly, as the disease declines, settles down to
the sediment, by orderly proceeding of nature.

Smoke.
2. Smoke, in colour, blackish, reddish, or yellow, signifies viscous and
tough matter adust, choleric. Abundance of unnatural heate, puffing up, and
elevating some raw matter, and therefore continuance of sharp diseases not
without danger.

3. Small grains, kernels, drops or motes dispersed, ragged ( granula
divulsa) which if they appear near to the top of the urine, especially if
they be blackish, they signify adustion of the matter, and wasting of the
solid parts, as also that they are violently puffed up by unnatural heate of
maligne agues, which oftentimes are mortal, Mont. 51.

Deformed contents appearing in the circle round about the urine, commonly
called the crown ( corona) which sometime is wanting, and signifies,

Equal conflict betwixt nature and the disease.

The crown appearing round about the urine signifies generally.

1. Some windinesse, whereof the crown is made.

2. Affections and griefs of the head.

3. If the colour of the crown differing from the rest of the urine be better,
it is a good sign, that nature overcommeth, but if it be worse an ill sign,
that nature is overcome.

The placing of the urinal, and difference of the sight, may cause divers
colours in the crown, because it consists indifferently in the confines or
common concurse of three diverse transparent mediums ( media) the urinal, the
urine, and the air; and therefore the colours of the crown may be variable
according to the diverse position of the urinal, the urine, the air, and the
eye of a Physician beholding it. Like other apparent and not permanent colours,
which are made of diverse mixture of light and dark. ( Lucidi umbrosi) as
colours of the rainbow, of a Doves neck, a Peacocks tail, changeable taffeta,
and morning clouds lightened with the Sunne-beames, infinitely variable,
according to their diverse positions and placings, taught in the precepts of
optikes. Therefore Actuarius counsel is, to look into the crown with one eye.

Colours of the crown.
Leadish.
1. Leadish, blew, and black, signify the falling sickness, or mortification
of the brain, whereby the sinews do not their duty in sense and motion.

2. First leadish, then red certain days after, signifies head-ache, or
recovery of the animal power.

Green.
3. Green signifies choler green like leekes ( porracea) or frenzy of
green choler, if it be in a sharp ague: or adustion of hot choler assaulting
the head.

4. Black is of the same judgement that black water is of. For it signifies
mortification, if leadish colour went before: or adustion, if green.

Thick crown joined with colours.

Saffron.
1. Saffron signifies choler in the head, and head-ache thereof.

White.
2. Waterish and white, phlegm in the hinder part of the head.

Claret.
3. Claret, or crimson, abundance of blood in the head, pricking pain of the
temples, fullness of the veins, and the patient supposing himself to see
little red motes flying before his eyes. Or head-ache through abundance of
blood.

Thin crown joined with colours.

Flaxen.
1. Flaxen, signifies ache in the left side, of the head of melancholy. Or the
head, to be of cold and dry constitution. Or melancholic complexion, and
therefore suspicious, fearful, covetous.

Yellow.
2. Yellow, head-ache of choler pricking in the side of the head.

Crown trembling, shaking, quivering, signifies

Crown trembling.
1. Pain all along down the backebone.

2. Windinesse.

3. Thin humour.

4. Stopping of the flowers. Deformed contents floating in the top of the urine;
either in the crown, or all over the top, as spume, froth, bubbles, drops of
oil, or drops of fat like spider-webs.

Some* froth* bubbles.
Some, froth, bubbles, is an extension, swelling, or puffing up of a viscous
moisture in a thick and gross vapour thorough agitation: either of heate, as
in water seething. Or motion, as in the sea. Or both, as in running waters. In
urine they are made as Montanus thinks, of natural or unnatural heate
rarefying and dissipating, some tough, viscous, and flegmie matter in the
veins resisting, whereupon the heate not finding ready issue, doth puff up
and extend it, making froth or bubbles. But Argenter mislikes this opinion for
that, in bastard agues, quotians, and tertians, where both phlegm and
unnatural heate abound, which might stir and puff it up, and yet froth doth
not always accompany these agues. Therefore he thinks that froth in the
urine, is always caused of motion, and gives signification of rhewmes and
destillations, descending from the head into the inferior parts, c. They
appear in the urine, being caused either of cause external, or internal.

External cause of some, froth, and bubbles.

External cause.
1. Eating of pulse or fruit, surfeiting, Fernel.

2. Pissing with some violence into the urinal.

3. Shaking of the urinal, Aegid. 68. Salvian. 144.

Internal cause.
Internal cause of some froth, or bubbles, wherein are considered (as in other
contents) colour, quantity, substance, time of their appearance, and their
differences.

Colour of the some, froth, and bubbles.
Diverse.
1. Diverse. Signifies crudity, Aegid. 68.

White.
2. White. Raw and flegmaticke matter.

Saffron.
3. Saffron. Iaundice. But mixed with some whiteness in the middle, diseases
of the lungs.

4. Lead colour or blackish, Leadish.
matter adust.

Black.
5. Black. Extinction of natural heate.

Quantity of the some, c.
Much.
Much, many, or thick together, long continuing, and scarcely to be abolished
with a rods end, wrapped about with flax* and put into the urine, Aegid. 66.
and signifies

In whole men. Some tough and viscous matter which natural heate stirs:
wherefore good diet must be used, least more matter be increased, or natural
heate hindered.

In sick men (if they appear in the crown or circle) abundance of raw tough
matter mixed with ventositie and agitation thereof, which may signify colicke,
head-ache, surfeit. But if they appear over the whole face of the urine, they
signify weakness of the head, flux of seed, weakness of nature, through
obstructions and raw humours. Also if they appear in the beginning of diseases,
an ill sign, because such agitation, is of unnatural heate, and accompanied
with other ill signs, as weakness, old age, feeble, pulse, winter, c. mortal.

But appearing in the urine after the beginning of diseases with other good
signs, it is a good signification of health, because such agitation is of
natural heate now prevailing against the disease. But with other ill signs,
as ill colour and contents, c. it gives ill signification that such agitation
is of unnatural heate, and in weak persons, Death, but in strong persons,
Long sickness, and great danger, Week.

Little.
Little quantity of the spume, froth, bubbles.

Little or few, and dispersed, two or three together signify less head-ache
and ventosity, c. except the colour be yellow, for so choler increases the
grief.

Substance of the spume, c.
Thick.
Thick, a better sign.

Thin.
Thin, a worse sign especially in agues signifying great grief, Blas. Holler.
162.

Time of appearance.
Time of appearance
Not appearing at the first, and afterwards appearing, signify concoction or
declination of an ague. As in thick urine. See there.

Differences of spume, froth and bubbles, be three.

1. Little bubbles ( granula) like pinne-heads, Granula.
or little drops of quicke-silver, descending downwards towards the swim
under the crown into the body of the urine, signify griefs of the head, as
rhewme, which distilling down into the inferior parts of the body, as to the
nose, makes the pose, to the eyes, and causes ophthalmie. To the ears,
making a singing noise, and deafness. To the palate of the mouth, and makes
the uvula to fall down. To the throat, and causes hoarsenesse. To the mouth,
and causes exulcerations. To the jaws and mandible, tooth-ache. To the
windepipe, the cough. To the lungs, shortness of breath: to the guts, the
colike, iliake, whereof sometime follows a laske or flixe. To the stomach,
crudity. To the huckle-bone, sciatica. To the joints in the hands, knees, and
feet, the gout. To the reins, the nephresie. Also the passages by which the
rhewme distills, are many, as the arteries, backbone, and veins: also the
meat-pipe, winde-pipe, and sinews. But the rhewme descending from the head by
any of these three last, doth not necessarily cause bubbles in the urine. We^.

2. Great bubbles ( Ampullae) signify grief in the reins ( nephritis) for
the reins being cold and far distant from the heart the fountain of heate,
Ampullae.
and rhewmatike matter also cold and heavy, and descending downward, is also
drawn by the reins, and there for want of heate remains unconsumed, and so
breeds grief in the reins, in urine thin, and white bubbles. Also according
to Rhasis flux of blood at the nose. If they be round, pleurisy, Gout with
rhewme and an ague.

Spume, foam.
3. Spume, froth, signify grief in the middle members of the body, as heart
liver, spleen, c. rising of such causes as the colours of the urine show,
Fern. 453. Windinesse, collike. In yellow colour, the jaundice. In leadish oily
and palew, the phthisicke.

Note.
But of some, spume, and bubbles, we can safely gather no general precept,
save only that they signify abundance of gross and raw humours, which being
moved in the body, do cause such spume and bubbles, and so consequently length
of the disease in strong and lusty persons, and death in weak and feeble,
especially the spume and bubbles long continuing in great quantity, Salvian.
152.

Drops of oil or fat. Spider-webs.
Drops of fat like spider-webbes, drops of oil swimming aloft, signify

1. Colliquation or consumption for the most part mortal of the whole body,
with an ague, and then this fat is pissed slowly by little and little, at
several times, and in small quantity, and well mixed or incorporated into the
urine, but at the later end of the consumption when the patient is almost
spent, this fat cease to issue with the urine, being already dissolved and
voided, and the body decaying lean and dry, Salvian.

2. Colliquation of the reins and bladder only without an ague, the fat being
pissed fast, suddenly, in good quantity, at once, and not so perfectly mixed
with the urine, and with pain and heate about the reins. Yet Cardan saith,
that he himself observed small slender spider-webbes in his own urine every
day for 40. years together, and likewise in many other urines without any hurt
at all, and therefore he thinks that these spider-webbes which signify
colliquation must be greater, Salvian. 164.

3. Inflammation of the liver.

4. Critical evacuation in concoction and declination of the disease of some
humour offending, whereby some fat member receives hurt, and so part of his fat
is dissolved, Salvian.

5. Oil drunken, Fernel.

CHAP. IX.
Of the smell of Urine.
No smell.
SMell of urine is either none at all. 2. or sweet. 3. or stinking.

No smell at all signifies extreme and mortal cold in sharp diseases,
especially if stinking* urines were made before, and no ease of the patient
succeeds, Salvian. 60. Vassae. 60. Argent. Montanus.

2. Sweet smell of the urine is either of cause external, or internal.

External cause, as

Sweet smell.
Fernel. Bertin.

2. Eating of turpentine, c. because it is not easily changed in the body by
reason of his viscosity, nor draws any store of matter with it, Argent. 60.
Salvian. 60. c. Montanus thought, that by eating of sweet smelling things, the
urine should stincke, and contrariwise by eating of stinking things, the urine
should have a sweet smell, whom Argenterin confuteth. For garlic stinks, and
being eaten, makes the urine also stink, and contrary turpentine, hath of
himself a good smell, which being taken into the body, gives the same smell
to the urine.

Internal cause, as

Dominion of good blood not putrefied.

Ill or stinking smell.
3. Ill, or stinking smell, is likewise of cause external, or internal.

External cause, as

1. Perfuming it with stinking perfumes, as assafetida, galbanum, sagapenum,
smoke of burnt feathers, brimstone, c.

2. Eating of Carduus benedictus (because it doth move and stir up the
humours, and converteth them to the passages of urine:) of rue, onyons,
annise-seed, garlic, rotten cheese, stalks of sperage, fenell, fengreeke, c.
Argent. Salvian. 98. Aegid. 11. Fernel. vide P. Upon. in problem. Arist. 2. 14.

Internal cause.
Men's urines according to the diverse constitutions of the bodies from whence
they come, are in several degrees of better or worse smell: for those who have
abundance of pure blood and other humours according to their natural
disposition, free from putrefaction, and expel their excrements both
universal and particular, in due time and quantity, and have a moderate use of
the six things not natural, do make urine (as all other excrements) less
stinking, yet somewhat ordinarily, because urine, as all other excrements, come
of impure matter, and in men's bodies, which be moist, and subject to
putrefaction. Yet not in all bodies stinking ill, seeing it is concoct, Argent.
And though it is too base for the Physician, yea sometimes dangerous to put his
nose to the urine, to discern the stench thereof: yet the knowledge hereof
hath good use amongst other differences of urine, yea, in demonstrating
putrefaction, ulcers, and impostumes in mans body, is to be preferred before
all other, Argent. But to come to the matter again. Stinking urines are
evermore an argument of putrefaction, 1. either of the humours, 2. or solid and
substantial parts of mans body. Which you may distinguish thus, for if the
putrefaction be in the humours only, the stink began lately, and the urine is
thick or troubled, and chances by one of these three ways: either for that
the humours

Putrefaction of humours.
1. Breed crudity, through want of heat, as in those which are full of ill
humours, as phlegm and melancholy, because they make the urine thicker, and
being cold, not provoking the vessels to expulsion, they stay longer in the
body, and breed putrefaction.

2. Stay too long in the body, as in the strangury, dysury, stone, when the
sediment is full of filth, and pain in pissing, so in exulcerations or
impostumes of the reins, or bladder and gonorrhoea, the urine white and
thick, and the sediment full of matter, Fernel. Salvian. 99. so in creticall
evacuations of impostumes, and inflammations, with ease of the patient, and
signs of concoction.

2. Are infected with the plague, in a confused and troubled, red urine, with
little motes much dispersed. With morbus gallicus, with sandy and gravelly red
contents.

Putrefaction of solid parts.
But if the putrefaction be in the solid and substantial parts of mans body,
as the liver, spleen, veins, c. it is with pain, and in urine rather thin
then thick; and the stench of long continuance, for which causes there is
great danger: for thin urine seldom stinks, for want of putrefied humours
and excrements. And stench long continuing, shows that the putrefaction is
entered into the habit of the body, Cappivac. 112. Argenter.

Some say that the urine stinks in some sharp agues, Note.
and diseases, which Salvian denies, save only in the plague.

CHAP. X.
Of the manner of pissing.
MAnner of pissing, is either hard and uneasy: or else involuntary.

Painful pissing.
Painful, hard, and uneasy pissing is either because that the

1. Urine is too sharp (as in the strangury) by mixture of some sharp humours,
as salt, phlegm, choler, purulent matter: or by ill diet, or some hot
distemperature in the veins, as in sharp and continual agues, or some
critical evacuations. Or when the glandulous parts about the bladder are dried
up by immoderate venery, disease, or medicine, which should mitigate the
sharpness of the urine.

2. Vessels of urine, reins, bladder, yard, either too weak, or troubled with
exulcerations, by which urine passing causes pain and smarting. 2. Also with
impostumes, swellings, gatherings, in which the urine is first white, then
filthy, and lastly rotten. 3. With inflammations, whereof follows vomiting of
choler, continual ague, and pain in the reins, Bertin. 4. With obstruction
of the stone and gravel (as you may read, page. 64.) Of tough and clammy
humours, and ventositie distending the vessels. 5. With distemperature of heate
and dryness. 6. With convulsion of ( sphincter) the muscle shutting the neck
of the bladder, or of the sinews adjoining.

3. Blood, or the womb is inflamed.

4. Guts, or the womb distended with tumors or ventositie, as in the colicke,
whereby the reins and emulgent veins are pressed and straitened.

In voluntary pissing, when one makes urine unwittingly, or against his will,
which happens either for that the

Involuntary pissing.
1. Vessels of urine, bladder, reins, c. have their retentive faculty hurt,
weakened, or decayed, as in the Apoplexy, falling sickness, paulsey. Or when
the muscle ( sphincter) shutting the neck of the bladder; Or sinews coming
from the back, serving thereto are hurt, by fall, beating, wound, c. Or made
feeble and weak by cold distemperature, or by too much moisture in children,
or dryness in old men, whereby the aforesaid muscle and sinews cannot detain
their urine, but many times they bepiss their bed. So in great and sudden
fear, when the blood, heate, and spirits, fly to the heart, and inward parts,
whereby the outward parts, and those which be far distant from the heart, are
destitute of blood, heate, and spirits, so men suddenly terrified and astonished,
not only void urine, but other excrements against their will. Likewise in the
pissing ill, the urine white and much, and the patient thirsty, and the body
decaying. See before, cap. 5.

2. Principal Agent the brain not directing the animal faculty, nor
communiting it the sinews and muscles of the vessels of urine, whereupon they
cease from their function, and let the urine pass away by drops, as they
receive it, as in mad men, raving, doting, in sharp diseases, but if there be
other signs of concoction, it signifies critical flux of blood at the nose,
because the matter being drawn up to the brain, and yet signs of recovery,
must be voided at the nose, Salv. 113.

CHAP. XI.
Of suppression of urine.
Urine is suppressed in whole men being occupied in some importunate business,
as pleading at the bar, preaching, reading, c. Also sleeping, whereby they
cannot be at leisure, or else forget, and so for a space their urine is wholly
suppressed, but in process of time must needs have issue, neither is it in
mans free choice always to suppress his urine, though for a time he may. For
it is not simply a voluntary action, as speaking and walking is, c. but mixed
partly voluntary, partly natural, as cough, neesing, vomit, belching, sighing,
respiration, c. whereto we refer, evacuation by stool, and urine, c. but seeing
this suppression of urine doth neither give signification of sickness nor
health, we leave further to speak of it.

Suppression of urine in sick men.
Suppression of urine in sick men is either because the,

1. Vessels of urine are weak and not able either to draw the matter of urine,
or to expel it being made.

2. Watery humour the material cause of urine is wanting, as in want of drink
or moist meats. 2. Or else is converted another way, as in the dropsy,
Argenter. laskes, c. But in these cases the urine is rather little then none at
all. See little quantity of urine before, cap. 6. 3. Or is obstructed and
stopped that it cannot have issue either by some tumor or inflammation
accompanied with swelling, pain, an ague, c. or of schirrous swelling without
pain or ague: or impostume with pain or an ague, or lastly, some fleshly
substance, descending from some ulcer, with some blood and small fragments of
flesh voiding with the urine, and a syringe put up at the yard into the neck
of the bladder, and removing the fleshy fragments away, the urine presently
issues: or with the stone, and then gravel was voided before: or by clods of
blood, remaining after some issue of blood, or by some purulent matter
proceeding from an ulcer, or lastly by some thick and gross humours, or filth
and corruption descending from the veins, liver, or other superior members,
which suppression of urines in agues especially continual, signifies death
more certainly, then any other sign in the urine. In this case Argenterius
scarcely ever knew any escape death; unless the fault be in the reins or
bladder, Arg. 89. 4. Or when the bladder is so distended, by too great quantity
of urine too long kept, that it cannot unburden it self thereof, Wecker in
Ischuria, and therefore it is convenient to peace, as often as need requires,
and not to keep it too long, for thereof arises suppression of urine (that we
speak of) and sometime the stone, or difficulty in pissing, and sometime the
dropsy; neither on the other side do I commend their practise, who like dogs
are still pissing, for besides many other inconveniences, they bring their
vessels of urine to such an ill custom, that in old age (when the retentive
faculty through want of heate decaying) they can scarcely hold their urine, but
it will issue from them against their will. But I wish all men to void their
excrements both by stool (for being too long kept in the body, they annoy the
head by their stinking fume ascending, breed ventosities, wringing in the guts,
cholike, c.) and by urine, that they may follow their ordinary course of life,
for therefore nature hath appointed muscles to the neck of the bladder, and
seat, that men may at their pleasure detain their excrements for some space.
Placotomus de tuenda valitudine.

2. Sometime the greater guts are so obstructed through tough and viscous
phlegm, that the meat and drink concocted in the stomach, cannot come to the
liver to receive further concoction and separation of urine, Holl. lib. 1. cap.
47. de morbis internis.

4. Sometime the backebone is bruised, broken, or hath some dislocation in the
joints: that thereby the vessels of urine cannot perform their duty, Wecker.

CHAP. XII.
Of what parts of the body urine gives signification.
Urine gives signification of diseases of such parts of the body,

1. Whence it receives matter whereof it is made colour, substance, contents,
darkness, perspecuity, smell, as the stomach, guts, mesaraicall veins, and
all other parts of the body, for the material cause of urine is drink, or
other liquor, which in the stomach is accurately mixed and incorporated
together with the meat, and made one substance and white juice called of the
physicians Chylas, which descending into the winding capacity of the guts is
separated partly into excrement, and partly nourishment. For the purer part
thereof is sucked of the mesaraicall veins, and conveyed thence to vena porta,
and at length to the liver, where being converted into blood, and the
excrementitions parts thereof, sequestered and sent to their proper receptacles,
as choler to the gall, melancholy to the spleen, and the watery thin part to
the reins, but not all, for some part thereof together with the blood (which
it makes thinner for more easy conveyance) is distributed into every member
of the body. From whence so much as is not spent in the body, or evaporated out
by sweat, or insensible perspiration, returns back again the same way to
the liver, whence it is drawn of the emulgent veins, and descends to the
reins and bladder. Therefore urine is not only made of that watery substance
which is drawn from the liver, but also from the greater and less veins, and
from the whole body. As he may easily and plainly perceive by experience, who
will for three or four days together, either receive no drink at all, or but
little. The urine therefore, that is neither too thin by much quaffing, nor
otherwise polluted by mixture of other impurities, doth manifestly show the
state and constitution of the humours which are in the liver and greater veins.
And also, though not so manifestly, in the smaller veins and all other parts
of the body, Fernel.

2. Where it is made, as the liver, and the hollow vein.

3. By which it passes, as the emulgent veins, reins, and water conduits.

4. Wherein it stays, as the bladder with his muscles and sinews.

5. By which it is expelled, as the yard.

6. Which do deprive it of any colour, substance, perspecuity, darkness,
quantity, contents or smell, as when it is not made, or being made is not
attracted, or not expelled, or obstructed and stopped in the vessels that it
cannot have passage to be voided, as by rumours, gross humours, stone, gravel,
inflammations, ulcers, impostumes, flesh growing, wind, or through weakness,
distemperature, fractures, ruptures, dislocations, wounds of the vessels of
urine, either primary in themselves, or by consent of others, c. Or being made,
is converted another way, as to the head in frenzies, to the stomach in
vomitings, to the belly in dropsies, to the guts in lasks, to the mother in
flux of terms, to the cods in ruptures, to the joints in sciatica, gout, to
the parts weak, grieved, inflamed, apostomated, c.

7. Which do exonerate themselves by urine, as the head in rhewmes, frenzies,
c. The throat in the squinsie, the lungs in inflammations, the solid parts in a
consumption, the spleen in melancholic diseases, the veins or arteries
broken, in pissing of blood, the spermatike vessels, in flux of seed, the
mother in terms suppressed and voided by urine the hemorrhoidall veins in the
emeraudes, the joints in the sciatica, or gout, and diverse other parts of the
body in evacuation, critical, symptomaticall, or artificial.

Of all these you may find several examples in this treatise precedent.

CHAP. XIII.
Of crude, concoct, and dangerous urines.
BEcause mention is often made heretofore, of crude, concoct, and dangerous
urines, as also that they be very needful to be known perfectly, always had
in memory; seeing they comprehend in few words, the sum of all that hath
heretofore bin spoken. I thought good in the end to add the description
thereof.

Concoct urine.
Concoct urine, such as men only make who are in some latitude of health, is in
colour palew, light saffron.
substance, mean. contents equal, white, light.
smell, not stinking. pissing in due time without pain, heate, cold.



Crude urine.
Crude urines only. Such as men make inclining to sickness, or recovering after
sickness, is in colour white, pale, saffron, claret,
substance thicker, thinner.
contents whitish, pale, somewhat unequal.
smell, not much stinking. pissing not in due time.


Vrines* mean betwixt crude and concoct, are of two sorts. 1. For either they
incline more to concoct. Such as have a good colour, but thin substance. Also a
white and light sediment, but not equal.

2. Or else they incline more to crude. Such as have reddish colour, like to
water wherein raw flesh hath been washed, which are made of blood not perfectly
concoct.

Vrin crude and dangerous.
Urine, Crude and dangerous, such as men make who are grievously sick and in
danger not to recover, is in colour green, ash colour, black.
substance very thin, very thick, oily.
contents green, ash colour, oily, black, very unequal, deformed.
smell very stinging. pissing altogether out of due time. Or not at all, B.
Holler. 270. Cappiva^. 195.


CHAP. XIV.
Of methodical practise in judgment of Vrines.
Considerations fit for practise.
BEfore you give judgement of the urine; it is needful that you meditate with
your self on these precepts following in order.

1. Remember the general considerations in the first chapter, both concerning
the urinal and the urine. As also which be the best urines simply, and in
respect of age, sex, complexion, time of the year, kind of life, c. which
you may have so perfectly in memory, that you can presently tell how far that
urine which is brought unto you, differs from a good urine, in colour,
substance, contents, c.

2. Whether the urine be altered by some external cause mentioned in the first
chapter and throughout the book; or else through default of the reins and
bladder by which the urine passes. For these two impediments either several
or concurring, hinder the judgement of the inner parts, Fernel. 443.

3. Consider what diseases are incident to the country where the patient
dwells, or what common disease is their stirrings: as for example, if the
patient be an old man, and in winter, rainy weather, and in a moist and fennish
country, it can hardly be otherwise, but that he is troubled with a cough,
rhewme, pose, and lack of digestion, and the rather if he be given to
surfeiting, much drinking, and be of a flegmatike complexion, and heretofore
troubled with rhewmatike diseases. But contrariwise, if he be a young man, and
choleric, in the middle of summer, hot weather, hot climate, after hot diet
and immoderate exercise, it is very likely, that he is troubled with a burning
ague, tertian, flixe, or pluresie, to which of these he is most subject, or
which at that time is most stirring in that country. After this sort you may
judge of other diseases without help of the urine.

Three causes of internal diseases.
4. If the urine be faulty, and yet neither through external cause, nor of the
reins, then it must needs show some distemperature of the inward parts, heart,
liver, spleen, lungs, veins, or other part of the body. Which distemperature
is either simple, without mixture of humours, which colour of the urine in thin
substance will show, or with mixture of humours in a thick and troubled
substance, or else putrefaction, in a confused urine. Which three be the
internal causes almost of all diseases, whereby you have already attained no
small knowledge, what to do, or what evacuation is convenient for the cure of
the disease, although you cannot as yet, particularly understand the same.
Fernel.

5. Of all differences of urines colour is most mutable and uncertain of
signification, Which difference of urine is to be preferred in certainty of
signification, and wherein.
as being subject to many alterations of light cause. As by much drinking, thin
drink, as water, white wine, or by eating of hot spices, sena, cassia, c. yea
in one day every urine that a man makes is unlike an other in colour, so that
here especially the infamy that urine is a lying strumpet, hath some appearance
of truth. Contrariwise the contents of urine are of most certain and true
signification of all other, and least subject to alteration, for that they are
either fragments of the parts of the body, or contained in the parts. Of these
Hippocrates and Galen especially make mention, not greatly regarding the rest.
The other differences of urine, substance, perspecuity, darkness, quantity,
smell, c. are of mean signification betwixt colour and contents. And yet every
difference hath special signification above the rest in some diseases: Smell.
for stinking smell of urines gives more perfect signification of putrefaction,
ulcers, or impostumes, then either colour, substance, or contents. Suppression
of urine, in agues especially continual, Suppression.
gives more certain signification of death, then thin substance, ill colour,
or want of contents: for these show one crudity, which in time is curable: but
the other happens through great obstructions of the reins, liver, or other
superior member, which at that time are incurable. Colours.
Colours of urine collected in due time, from an orderly patient, gives better
signification of the humour loffending in the body, then any other. Last^y,
Contents.
contents issuing with the urine, do especially signify strength of nature,
which in time will prevail against the disease. For when the digestive faculty
is weak, the matter whereof contents arise, cannot be overcome and prepared to
be voided. So that every difference of urine hath some special signification
above the rest, Arg. 89.

6. Also you must often see the patients urine on divers days and divers times
of his sickness, and diligently mark the perseverance or alteration of the
urine from time to time, and whether it change from worse to better or
otherwise. How the urine alters in diseases.
For as the patient recovers, nature proceeds orderly and by degrees from
unperfect to perfect, from sickness to health, and so by little and little
changes the urine: first, the colour, which is easiest: secondly, it waxes
clearer; thirdly, the substance waxes mean betwixt thin and thick; fourthly,
when concoction is stronger, contents appear. And therefore if contents
appear first before colour, cleernesse or substance, there is the less
security of health: because this is not the orderly course of nature, but some
symptomaticall fit of the disease, which will soon vanish away and decay. And
therefore to good purpose must you always remember this theorem commonly
received of the Physicians, that nature ordinarily first conformeth the colour,
then the substance, and lastly the contents, Mont. 52.

How the colour alters.
This is the orderly course and proceeding of nature in respect of the colour.
In the beginning of diseases, when all the humours are raw, the urine is white.
In the increase and state of the disease, higher and deeper colours. In the
declining, more remiss again, until at length it returns to his mean
colour again.

How the substance alters.
In respect of the substance, in the beginning it is thin, for nature hath yet
made no separation. In the increase and state it waxes more thick and
troubled, through natural heate now beginning to work some separation and
expulsion of the humour, in declining it waxes clearer and thinner again, when
natural heate doth attenuate, raresie; and desipate the flatuous and gross
humours, and so the urine waxes less troubled. To conclude, for substance of
urine mark these four differences.

1. First thin, and so continuing, is worst of all, signifying extreme
crudity.

2. First thin, and afterwards waxes thicker, and more troubled, better then
the former both for heate and strength of nature.

3. First troubled and thick, and so continuing, better then the two former,
for better heate, and more lively strength of nature.

4. First thick and troubled, and afterwards clearing and waxing thinner, the
thicker part settling down to the sediment, best of all in diseases, as now
almost returning to a mean substance, such as is in whole men's urines.

How the contents alter.
In respect of contents not altogether unnatural. In beginning of humorall
diseases through crudity there appear no contents at all* in increase and
state, the disease continuing strong, and natural heate weak, some though few
in declination, when nature waxes stronger prevailing against the disease, more
contents appear, and first in the cloud or uppermost region, then in the
middle region or swim, and lastly in the sediment.

And this is the ordinary alteration of urine in all humorall diseases wherein
is good hope of recovery (except it be accidentally hindered by obstruction or
conversion another way, and which have distinction of time of beginning,
increase, state and declination. For sharp diseases through their vehement and
furious assaults, do not admit such special distinction.

8. Lastly, it is good for him that now begins to practise, and hath not as
yet attained to some good measure of skill, to exercise himself in these
three, as principal guides of all his judgements, c. The best urine, page. 6.
Crude, concoct, and dangerous urines, page. 105. and especially mortal urins
which have signification of death, wherein the credit of the Physician chiefly
consists. For which purpose in the alphabetical index under death I have
collected all mortal diseases, whereof urine gives signification in this
treatise. But yet it is not the safest way resolutely to prognosticate death by
them, especially in a young and lusty man, except other ill signs concur, as
want of strength, pulse, feeble, and inordinate ra^ing* breathing with
difficulty, lack of rest, hollow eyes, sharp nose, in voluntary weeping,
gathering of straws and flocks, want of sleep and appetite, cold sweat,
trembling of the nether lip, excrement by stool, black, green, or stinking,
c. But contrariwise* if the patient draw his breath with ease, have a good
pulse, be strong, lye in bed decently, have a cheerful countenance, his sleep
and appetite not much decayed, and his excrements not altogether unnatural,
do confirm good hope of recovery. And in like sort in all significations of
urine be not too confident, but add other pathog^monicall signs for better
confirmation and more certain signification of the kind, nature, and quality
of the disease. Et qu^ non prosunt singula, multa i^va^t.

CHAP. XV.
Of the qualities, commodities, and medicines of urine: and of diseases
touching urine, and the remedies thereof.
HItherto we have compendiously handled the differences, causes, and judgements
of urine. But that the treatise may be more absolute, we will add something
more of the qualities, and benefit of urine which it hath either inwardly
received, or outwardly applied to mans body.

The quality of Urine.
All urine (as Galen saith, lib. 10. de simpl. medie. facult. de urina) is hot
and sharp (as Aegineta thinks) but yet differing in degree according to them
that make it. For the hotter they are that make it, in complexion, age, time of
the year, and diet, the hotter it is also; yet mans urine (whereof we speak) is
the weakest of all other, except tame barrow-hogs, which in many points agree
with man, yet it is also of a strong clensing or abstersive virtue, as any
thing else, which Galen proves by the example of fullers, who use it to skoure
and cleanse their cloth.

The commodity and medicines of urine being taken inwardly.

A mans own urine drunken is good against the biting of vipers, and poison,
and against the dropsy lately begun. Diosc. lib. 2. cap. 27.

A childes urine under the age of 14 years being drunken, helps those that
are troubled with straitness of breath ( orthoponea) which though Galen
reporting derideth as insufficient and loathsome, yet Avicen. lib. 2. can. cap.
proprio. doth greatly commend, for that by experience in many diseased persons
he found it true.

A mans urine is good for diverse diseases of the womb and bowels, especially
for the colic: because that partly with provoking of vomit, and partly by
occasion of sieges, it expels strongly all noisome humours, and for the same
cause do common practitioners keep it still in daily use. Record Marcello.

Vldericke Hutten also witnesses, that he did drive away the ague above eight
times with the only drinking of his own urine, at the beginning of his
sickness, which practise many still do use, and it proves well.

Likewise Galen, Paul Aegin^ta and Marsilius Ficinus write that diverse
drinking urine did think themselves preserved and cured from the pestilence.

Urine as Cardan saith, through his heate is of a thin and piercing substance,
so that it is lighter then some water, notwithstanding his saltness, for which
cause it is good against the colicke and ventositie in the guts far above
salt water, for through his subtle and piercing substance it finds passage to
the inward parts, and through his saltnes it scatters, breaks, and
disperses the ventositie, and strengthens the inward parts. But to this
purpose a childes urine under fourteen years old, and lately made is best, for
that is most piercing and hot. Cardan de subtilitate, lib. 17.

Medicines of urine outwardly applied.

Urine is good against the itch, and cleanses the leprosy, mixed with
salt-peter: stale peace cleanses running ulcers of the head, scurfe,
manginesse, and hot breakings out, it stays eating ulcers especially in the
privy members, and being put into the ears, it cleanses the rotten and
purulent matter, and being sodden in the rind of a Pomegrante kills the
worms thereof, sodden in a brazen vessel with honey, doth cleanse the scars
of the eyes, and cleereth the dimness thereof, the dregs of urine is good for
Saint Anthonies evil, if it be anointed thereon, so that (as as Galen doth
wisely add) the sore being cooled first with some other thing, and be not
burning. If it be heated with oil of privet, and laid to the womb of a
woman, it will assuage the grief of the mother, and cures the rising of the
same, it cleanses the eye-lids, and scars of the same, Dioscor. lib. 2. cap.
17.

Galen almost to the same purpose saith thus of urine: men's urine is of a
strong clensing virtue as any thing else, and therewith do fullers use to
scour and cleanse their cloth, which abstersive faculty Physicians perceiving,
did use it to soak, and wash manginesse and scabbednesse, and running sores
that are full of corruption, and filth, and especially if they have in them
putrefied matter, for such sores on the privy members it is good, and for
mattering ears, and for scales and scurfe, if the head be washed therewith. I
have healed with it many times sores on the tooes, namely which came of
bruises, and were without inflammation, and that in servants and husbandmen,
which had a journey to go, and no Physician with them, bidding them to wet a
small clout with it, and put it into the sores, and then to bind a cloth about
it: and as often as they listed to make water, to let it fall on their sore
toes, and not to take the cloth away till it were quite whole. That medicine
which is made of childes urine, called chrysocolla, or gold souder, which Galen
there teaches to make, is exceeding good for sores that are hard to heal: for
this medicine do I use for the chiefest, mixing therewith such other things,
as are good for such like sores. Galen, lib. 10. de simply. med. facult. cap.
de urina.

Childes urine will heal the sting of a Be, Wasp, and Hornet, if the place
be washed therewith.

It is good for travellers when they go to bed to wash their thighs
therewith, that they may be able to continue their journey the next day, and
the rather, if afterwards they anoint them with oil and juice of rue.

Mans urine is also good against the gout, which may appear for that fullers
are never troubled with the gout, by reason that their feet are so often washed
with it, and some who have had good experience thereof with great success, do
highly commend it for this purpose.

Seeing then urine hath so many commodities, and was in ancient time in so
great use (as Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, Columella, and all those that have
written of cure of horses, do sufficiently testify) it came to pass, that
the Emperors of Rome got yearly revenues by urines, as Suetonius reports of
Vespasian, who answered Titus reprehending him for seeking after gains by such
stinking wares, in this proverbial sentence, Bonus est odor lucri ex
requalibet.

Of diseases touching Urine, and the remedies thereof.
REcord in the latter end of his judicial of urines, sets down certain
simple medicines for some diseases which hinder urine, by whose example not
altogether impertinent to this treatise: I have likewise collected a brief
history of the said diseases with some medicines thereof. And first of the
stone.

The stone is engendered in mans body, as a brick which is first made of tough
clay, and put into an hot furnace where it waxes hard; so a stone is made of
tough, viscous, and slimy phlegm in the reins or bladder, where through heate
thereof it is parched and baked together into the hardness of a stone. But
that I may speak somewhat fuller thereof, and yet briefly, the material
cause of the stone is, as I said, a tough slimy phlegm, and all causes which
increase the same, as all crudities and surfeits, all meats gross, slimy, and
hard of digestion, as milk, new cheese, all white meats made of milk, all
crusts of flower wherein meat is baked, bread not well baked, unleavened. All
flesh of great beasts, especially old, as beef, venison: and all water-foule.
Great fishes, especially those who abound in slimy moisture, as eels, all
shell-fish, oysters, cockles, lopsters, crevises. All fruits which engender
gross humours, pears, apples* gourds. Roots which breed wind, as parsneps,
turnips. Also all new and thick wine and drink. Likewise because heate of the
reins doth bake and harden the said phlegm, and all causes which increase
heate in the reins, as too warm apparel whereby the back and reins are
kept too hot, running, leaping, violent exercise: also riding especially with
his back towards the Sun, standing against the fire with his back, and
meats, drinks, and spices which increase heate. Also when the vessels of urine,
the reins, c. have too strait passages, whereby that slimy phlegm cannot have
issue to be expelled, but stays within, and thorough heate waxes hard,
whereupon fat men through moistness, and old men through dryness, having
straight passages in the reins, are more subject to the stone in the reins,
and less in the bladder: contrariwise, children though they are hot and abound
with phlegm thorough ill diet, yet because their reins are wider and expulsive
faculty strong, whereby that flegmy matter is voided, are less troubled with
the stone of the reins, neither lean men for the selfsame cause, but both of
them are rather troubled with stone of the bladder, Hippor. 3. Aphoris. 26.
Lastly, an especial cause of the stone are the parents, from whom this
grievous hereditary disease doth descend upon the child: and this of all other
is hardest to be cuerd. Now with like brevity to come to the cure, seeing there
be four causes which help to breed the stone, tough and slimy phlegm, heate to
parch and dry it, straitness of the passage, and weakness of the expulsive
faculty. So many things as take away any of these, help for the cure thereof,
as first a good diet, brothes wherein borage, fenell, parsley, endive, or
succory is sodden, bread well baked and leavened, hens, capons, partridge,
mutton. Of fish, soles, plaice, trouts, salmons. Of herbs, borage, endive,
succorie, sperage, beetes. And to come to the cure. A vomit at the beginning
and diverse times, is of especial use to draw the flegmy matter away from the
reins and bladder: then a suppositary, to draw some superfluous excrements
downwards, and a clyster is to be preferred before a purgation because it
draws the excrements downwards from the reins, whereas a purgation taken by
the mouth doth always draw some impurity downwards to the reins, but yet the
clister may not be too great in quantity, lest it fill the guts, and distend
the reins, and so increase the pain, and stop the passage. After that, if the
body be full of blood, open the vein under the ankle and not in the arm (as
some would) for all parts of the body grieved above the liver, would be eased
by opening a vein in the arm, but under the liver, by opening the vein under
the ankle or under the knee. Galen Comment. lib. 9. Hippoc. de morbis
vulneribus. Galen de vena sectione, and then if the body abound with other
humours a purgation is convenient, but not strong at the first, lest it stir
the humours too much out of season before the passages be open. After this seek
to open the passages of urine about the reins partly with clyster, partly
outwardly by some fomentation, lineaments, insessions, but yet too much use of
these doth effoeminate the reins, and make them more subject to the humours
descending. Then at length you may minister medicines which provoke urine,
break and expel the stone. Of which medicines there is great diversity. For
some help to mitigate the heate of the reins, assuage the inflammation, and
hinder the gravel to grow together into a stone, and such be cooling,
senifiers of roughness, but not astringent, as the four less cold seeds.

2. Some provoke urine either for that they augment it by attenuating the
blood, and separating it from the wheyish substance, and carrying it to the
reins, these are hot and dry towards the third degree.

3. Or some provoke urine, because they minister much watery and wheyish
moisture to the body, which the reins drawing to them, do also draw some
humours out of the veins, as white wine, plantaine, and melons seed.

4. Or some again provoke urine, not by augmenting the quantity, but by
clensing, skouring the reins, and dissolving and expelling gravel now
beginning to grow together. As turpentine, root of restharrow, betony, fenell
seed and root, sperage, juice of limmons, root of sorrel, maiden hair,
ceterac.

5. Some again provoke urine by both these qualities, in ministering much
wheyish matter, also by clensing the passages.

6. Some provoke urine by their roughness, clensing the reins, and robbing or
fretting on the stone or gravel, as glass burned and beaten into powder,
eggeshels, gromill, the stone it self which came from a man beaten into powder.

7* Lastly, some provoke urine by an hidden and secret property, as lapis
Iudaicus, cassia, rheubarbe.

Those medicines which provoke urine in the second signification by augmenting
the quantity, are never to be used in any disease of the vessels of urine as
emulgent veins, reins, water-conduits, bladder or yard, for thereby they are
more hurt and obstructed by much quantity of urine passing that way. But such
medicines which do cool the heate of the reins, or which do cleanse and
mundefie them from impurity, already gathered, and neither exceed in heat or
dryness, but in subtle and piercing quality. Or which by propriety of their
substance help that way, as those in the fourth and seventh signification, and
yet these are not at all, or seldom to be used, when the body is lean or in a
consumption, or full of blood and ill humours, neither when the vessels of urine
are exulcerated or obstructed, or the passages strait, or when the womb or
privy members have any swelling or ulcer; or when the urine is suppressed, the
bladder being full, or issues with smart burning. For in all these the
medicines bring more impurity to the places grieved, and so increase the
disease, neither are they to be used in swellings or breakings out of the skin,
lest they draw the grief to the inward parts.

Of the strangury.
The strangury is caused either for that the urine is too sharp, which doth
provoke the expulsive faculty to expel it, before any quantity be gathered
together. Or for that the retentive faculty to the bladder is weakened through
some distemperature, especially of cold. Or else through some ulcer or
inflammation of the bladder, to which the urine coming doth extimulate the
expulsive faculty. Or lastly, when the womb or bowels being inflamed, or
swollen, do trouble or distend the bladder, as in women great with child, who
oftentimes peace little and often. Now as the cause of the grief is diverse,
so the medicines is likewise diverse for sharpnes of the urine, whether it come
of hot and salt meats, too much heating the liver and reins, or of medicines
which burn the blood, or of exercise which likewise heate the reins and
bladder, or lastly, that the moisture in the glandulous parts is dried up by
too much use of venery, leanenesse or dryness of the body, must be cured with
contrary diet, and medicine which moisten, take away the sharpness and cool
the blood as new laid eggs, chickens, veale, meats made of wheat and barley
meal, also lettuce, purslane, endive, sorrel, prunes, cherries, sweet apples,
cucumbers, melons, but mix not here with too much salt, vinegar, or other hot
spices, and if the body abound with sharp humours a gentle purgation is good of
cassia, manna, whey, diesebasten, also decoctions of lettuce, violets, sorrel,
purslane, adding thereto some licorize or prunes, the flowers or leaves of
malowes, the root of holihoke. And if the pain be raging, it is good to make
an injection by a syringe, of the white of an egg, with rose water or woman's
milk, or the juice of purslane, or plantaine, c. But if the glandulous
moisture be too much dried up, you must use such meats and medicines inwardly
and outwardly as do moisten the parts, as oil of violets, almonds, hens
grease, new butter also to make plasters to be applied to the places about the
privy members or injections, to be squirted up into the yard or clisters to the
same purpose.

Of the pissing evil.
The pissing evil is called, when the patient pisseth as fast as he drinks,
and in like quantity. Or when he pisseth against his will, and it chances
either through default of the bladder or reins. As when the retentive faculty
of the bladder is decayed through distemperature of cold and moistness: for
too much cold doth extinguish the natural heate of it, which is of a cold and
sinewy substance, and without blood, and too much moistness doth loosen the
small strings, serving to the retentive faculty, or when the expulsive faculty
is hurt through quantity or quality of the urine. Or lastly, when the muscle (
sphincter serving for voluntary motion, is decayed or weakened either through
cold or moistness, loosening, or obstructing or benumbing the muscle, as in
the paulsie, or is rent or wounded that it cannot do his duty, as some time
happens to those, who are cut for the stone in the bladder, where either the
unskilful Surgeon doth make too great incision, or the stone too big doth rent
the muscle in coming out. Whereupon though the wound grows whole again, yet
the weakness of the muscle remains: this grief is almost familiar to
children who bepiss their beds in sleep through weakness and looseness. Or
this grief happens through default of the reins being too hot, and so draw
the urine too fast from the liver and veins, and the retentive faculty weak
cannot hold the urine, but sends it as fast to the bladder.

Now for the cure (but I can say nothing of the cure of the muscle of the
bladder, for that being cut or wounded, c. incurable.) First the humour
offending must be removed, and then the distemperature corrected, the humour
offending if it be heate, must be removed by opening the liver vein in the
right arm, or by a gentle purgation of manna cassia, tamarindes, sirupe of
roses solutine, diasebesten, and diaprunon, but all without scammony and rather
often to be used, then much at once, that thereby nature by little and little
may be framed to void those humours by stool which descend to the reins, also
a vomit stronger for to draw the humours from the reins, and a sweat is not
inconvenient to draw them to the skin, and lastly to correct the
distemperature, and strengthen the parts, use some of these cooling medicines,
as lettuce, endive, suckory, forrell, also decoctions and sirups of the same,
and besides of purslane, roses, violets, and cooling meats and drinks. For
strong wines, and which have power to provoke urine are not good. Also a
ceare-cloth applied to the back, loins and veins to cool them, ceratum
refrigerans, unguentum rosaceum santalinam mesue. But if the cause came of
cold, a vomit and sweat is likewise good, also clysters, wherein oil of
cammomill, dill and bitter almonds must be used. And now and then it is good to
use pills of aloes and rheubarbe. The diet must be of hot things, and wherein
some hot spices are put. Lastly, use of cupping glasses without incision,
friction of the outward parts, and moderate exercise is convenient, both
because they heate the body, as also draw the humour away from the inward parts.
And thus much briefly of these diseases, not intending fully to handle the
same.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
Ache in the backbone, 85. Ache in the reins, 22, 61, 71, 90. Adustion of
blood, 40, 56, 60. Adustion of choler, 39, 64, 84. Adustion of humours, 40, 64,
87. Adustion of liver, 67. Adustion of melancholy, 40, 64. Agitation of humours,
72. Ague, 11, 13, 19, 35, 36, 40, 43, 51, 52, 59, 62, 90, 99. Ague beginning,
9, 28, 51. Ague burning, 6, 13, 49, 66. Ague continuing, 22, 66. Ague
continual, 22, 23. Ague dangerous, 23, 82. Ague intermitting, 23. Ague
lingering, 28. Ague malignant, 23, 82. Ague of choler, 78. Ague of the heate of
the Sun, 178. Ague quartain, 22, 24, 43, 52, 64. Ague quotidian. 33, 40. Ague
rotten, 80, 37. Ague semitertian, 37. Ague sharp, 43, 47. Ague tertian, 24, 33,
34, 37, 41, 52, 64. Agues mortal, vide death. Ague with a good sign, vide
sign. Anasarca, 46. Animal faculty recovered, 85. Apoplexy, 30, 73, 66, 96.
Apoplexy mortal, vide death. Appetite wanting, 43, 46. Appetite wanting with
death, 46.
B
Backbone pained, 85. Bladder altered, 40. Bladder exulcerated, 15, 61, 59, 65,
66, 68, 69. Bladder too open, 15. Bladder weak, 66, 69. Blood abounding, 37,
39, 55, 56, 70, 86. Blood adust, 40, 56, 60. Blood cloddy, 13. Blood good, 90.
Blood inflamed, 96. Blood too thin, 68. Blood turned into choler, and
evacuated, 54. Bloody flixe, 37. Brain mortified, 83. Breast diseased, 33.
Breath short, 40. Bruising, 40, 55, 65, 68. Business importunate.
C
Canker, 43. Carbuncle, 43. Cassia eaten, 42. Children pissing their beds, 96.
Choler, 19, 31, 84. Choler abounding, 34, 37, 54, 81. Choler adust, 39, 64, 84.
Choleric complexion, 10. Choleric diseases, 51. Choleric meats, ibid.
Cholicke, 38, 41, 90, 96. Cholicke mortal, vide death. Chronicall diseases,
43, 47, 52. Cold, 11, 20, 40, 44, 55, 90. Cold mortifying, 40. Cold of the
liver, 12, 45. Cold of the stomach, ibid. Colliquation of the bladder, 59, 90.
Colliquation of the reins, ibid. Colliquation of the solide parts, 60.
Colliquation of the whole body, 59, 90. Colour of urines how they may be
changed, 110. Colour of urine of what it gives best signification, 111.
Complexion, 9. Complexion choleric, 10. Complexion flegmaticke, 9, 33.
Complexion melancholic, 10, 34. Complexion sanguine, 10, 68. Conception, 72,
42, 60, 63, 74, 75. Conception of male, 72, 73, 75, 76. Conception of female,
72, 73, 75, 76. Concoction, 19, 125, 53, 80, 88, 93. Concoction absolute best,
25. Concoction beginning, 21, 32. Concoction exceeding the perfect, 26.
Concoction second weak, 56. Concoction strong, 56, 57. Confusion, 23.
Consumption, 28, 34, 37, 55, 59. Consumption of the lungs, 32, 41. Consumption
of the reins, 55. Consumption of the whole body, 55, 41, 47, 49. 60.
Consumption mortal, vide death. Contents in urine, of what they give best
signification, 111. Conversion of the humour, 14, 17, 32, 51, 79, 99. Conversion
of the humour to the belly, 14, 49. Conversion of the humour to the brain, 14,
17, 32. Conversion of the humour to the breast, 79. Conversion of the humour to
the cods, 14, 49. Conversion of the humour to the emeraudes, 49. Conversion of
the humour to the fret, 49. Conversion of the humour to the guts, 14, 49.
Conversion of the humour to the joints, 14. Conversion of the humour to the
liver, 14. Conversion of the humour to the lower parts, 49. Conversion of the
humour to the parts grieved, 14, 51. Conversion of the humour to the parts
inflamed, ibid. Conversion of the humour to the parts weakened, ibid. Conversion
of the humour to the pores of the skin, 14, 49. Conversion of the humour to the
reins, 14, Conversion of the humour to the spleen, 32. Conversion of the humour
to the short ribs, 14, 32, 79. Conversion of the humour to the stomach, 14, 64.
Conversion of the humour to the whole body, 14, 49. Convulsion, 42, 44, 47, 96.
Corruption, 23, 51. Cough, 39. Cramp, 37. Cramp mortal, vide death. Critical
evacuation, 10, 22, 42, 46, 68, 90, 93. Critical flux of blood at the nose,
97. Crudity, 11, 12, 16, 18, 20, 29, 51, 52, 53, 58, 59, 61, 86, 93. Crudity
mortal, vide death.
D
Death in agues, 90. Death in agues burning, 40. Death in agues hot, ibid.
Death in agues maligne, 82. Death in agues sharp, 43, 47. Death in agues
teatian and quotidian, 16. Death in agues when urine is suppressed, 95. Death
in apoplexies, 37. Death in appetite wanting. 46. Death in children, 7, 12, 29.
Death in cholickes, 38. Death in consumptions, 32, 47. Death in cramps, 37.
Death in diseases beginning, 16, 88. Death in diseases chronicall, 47. Death in
diseases sharp, 12, 60, 90. Death in dropsies, 37. Death in epilepsies, ibid.
Death in exulcerations of the lungs, 32. Death in flixes, 37, 46. Death in
frensies, 32. Death in iliakes, 37. Death in laskes, 37, 46. Death in old men,
37, 39, 81. Death in paulsies, 37. Death in the pissing evil, 28. Death in the
ptisike, 37. Death in small pocks, 68. Death in springals, 7. Death in
stranguries, 41. Death in suppression of urines in agues, 99. Death of cold,
40, 43, 55, 84, 90. Death of heate, 40, 44, 55. Death of weakness in old men,
37, 39. 81. Disease and heate striving in the veins, 97. Disease and nature
equal in conflict* 82. Diseases beginning, 12, 28. Diseases declining, 29.
Diseases continuing, 13, 16, 32, 20, 36, 55, 82. Diseases coming again, look
recidivation. Diseases internal whereof they all arise, 109. Diseases of
choler, 66. Diseases of phlegm, 30. Diseases of melancholy, 30, 66. Diseases of
the breast, 33. Diseases of the liver, 22, 23. Diseases of the lungs, 86.
Diseases of the mother, 30, 73. Diseases of the spleen, 33, 22, 43, 71, 68.
Diseases of the veins, 23. Diseases sharp, 43. 33. Diseases mortal, vide
death. Discenteries, 14. Dissolution of the reins, 63. Dissolution of the
whole body, ibid. Distemperature of heate, 34, 46. Distemperature of humours, 34
Distemperature of blood. 34 Drinking too much, 29, 45, 51, 52. Drinking too
little, 48. Dropsy, 13, 30, 35, 37, 41, 46, 99. Dropsy mortal, vide death.
E
Eating dry meats, 48. Eating immoderately, 29, Eating of turpentine, 90.
Eating of strong smelling things, 92. Emeraudes, 14, 51, 66, 71. Epilepsie, 37.
Epilepsie mortal, vide death. Evacuation, 28, Evacuation critical, 10, 22,
43, 46, 68, 90, 93. Evacuation symptomaticall, 22, 43, 46. Exercise great, 28,
50, 40. Exercisesmall, 29. Exulceration mortal, vide death.
F
Falling evil, 53, 71, 83, 99. Fasting, 50. Fear, 96. Felons, 13. Fistula,
66. Flixes, 34, 37, 46, 49. Flixes mortal, vide death. Phlegm abounding, 20,
34, 81, 86. Flegmatike complexion, 9, 33. Flegmatike diseases, 36. Flowers
issuing, 63. Flowers stopped, 43, 71, 85. Flux of seed, 35, 62, 63, 66, 93.
French pockes, 66, 70, 71. Frenzy, 13, 32, 33, 62, 84. Frensies mortal, vid.
death.
G
Gall obstructed, 38. Gall inflamed. 38. Gout, 14, 16, 30, 66, 72, 90.
Gluttony, 12. Gravel, vide sand.
H
Head cold and dry, 83. Head affected, 89. Head weak, 88. Head-ache, 36, 80,
82, 83, 87, 89. Head-ache present, 22. Head-ache to come, 22. Head-ache by
abundance of choler, blood or melancholy, 83. Health impaired, 18, 33. Health,
32, 39, 40, 50, 49, 78. Heate natural plentuous, 19, 47, 81. Heate natural
wanting, 18, 27, 56, 57. Heate natural extinct, 16, 40, 54, 87. Heate
unnatural, 16, 19, 28, 37, 55, 81, 87. Heate natuall in the liver, 47. Heate
natuall in the reins, 28, 47, 66. Heate natuall in the vessels of urine, 28.
Heate natuall in the whole body, 28. Heate mortal, 40. vide death. Humours
abounding, 18. Humours adust, 40, 66. Humours clammy, 13. Humours good, 19. Humours
moved, 60. Humour flegmaticke abounding, 20, 34, 81, 86. Humour offending
maligne, 28. Humour raw abounding, 34, 57, 61, 86, 90. Humour thin, 85. Hunger,
28, 51. Hydrocele, 14, 49.
I
Iaundice, 23, 86, 90. Iaundice yellow, 39. Iaundice black, 40. Iaundice
black with a good sign, 40. Iliake, 38. Iliake mortal, vide death.
Inflammations, 5. Inflammations of the gall, 38. Inflammations of the liver,
38, 59. Inflammations of the bladder, 59, 48. Inflammations of the
water-conduits, 48. Inflammations of the spleen, 38. Impostumes, 13, 27, 31,
49, 51, 39, 95. Impostumes breaking, 22, 35. Impostumes of the lungs, 62.
Judgment of urines how to be given, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111.
L
Labour, 28, 33, 38, 40. Laskes, 14, 37, 46, 49, 51. Laskes mortal. Leprosy,
66. Lethargy, 22. Liver cold 12, 47. Liver diseased, 22, 33. Liver exulcerated,
61. Liver hot, 47, 66, 69. Liver obstructed, 13, 55. Liver pained, 96, 69.
Liver weakened, 37, 55, 68. Loins bruised, 36. Looseness, 14. Lungs diseased,
86.
M
Madness, 42, 43, 81. Matter adust. 87 Matter tough. 87 Measils, 13, 49, 72.
Melancholy, 39, 42. Melancholy adust, 40. Melancholy indigested, 30. Melancholy
evacuated, 55. Melancholic complexion, 10, 83, 34. Mother diseased, 30, 73.
N
Nature. weakened, 16. Nephresie, 13.
O
Obstructions, 51, 96. Obstructions of the bladder. 58 Obstructions of the
emulgent veins. 58 Obstructions of the gall, 38. Obstructions mortal, vide
death. Obstructions of the liver, 13, 30, 38, 55. Obstructions of the reins,
13, 30, 58 Obstructions of the veins, 13. Obstructions of the vessels of
urine, 13, 30, 58, 96. Oil drunken, 90.
P
Pain in the joints, 66. Pain of the heart. 90. Pain of the liver. 90. Pain
of the middle-parts. 90. Pain of the spleen. 90. Paulsie, 30, 37, 48, 71, 96.
Paulsie mortal, vide death. Perfuming, 91. Pissing evil, 26, 47, 63, 97.
Pissing what motion, 97. Plague, 72, 94. Pleurisie, 62. Pocks french, 66, 78,
72. Pocks small, 53, 49, 33, 68. Pocks mortal, vide death. Pose, 43.
Pthisicke, 37, 90. Pthisicke mortal, 37. Purgations, 49. Purgations by stool,
51, by vomit, ibid. Pursines, 6^, 91. Putrefaction, 23, 92. Putrefaction of the
humours, liver, solide parts, spleen, veins, 94.
Q
Quartain ague, 22, 24, 43, 52, 64. Quotidian ague, 33, 50.
R
Recidivarion, 13, 30, 37, Reins affected, 36. bruised, 36. distempered, 96.
exulcerated, 15, 22, 61, 63, 66, 93, 96. fretted, 37, 65. hot, 28, 47, 66.
obstructed, 13, 31, 63. too open, 15. too weak, 12, 69. troubled with humours,
22. with ach, 22, 66, 71. unclean, 15, 68. Rhewme, 62, 72, 89.
S
Sand, 23, 63. Sanguine complexion, 10, 68. Scabbednesse of the bladder. 60.
Scabbednesse of the body. 60. Sciatica, 17, 14, 61. Scirrous humours of the
spleen, 38. Seed abounding, 70. flowing, 35, 62, 63, 66, 63. sharp, 70.
virulent, 70. waterish, 70. Semitertian, 73. Separation of raw humours, 35.
Sickness continuing, 60, 88. ending, 34. sharp, 60. Sign best in an urine to
judge by, 110. Sign evil in beginning of sickness, 18, 56. Sign evil in a
thick substance, 56, 41. Sign evil in ash colour, 40. Sign evil in the
cloud of the urine, 80. Sign good in agues, 55. Sign good in agues ending,
35. Sign good in the cloud of urines, 80. Sign good in jaundice black, 40.
Sign good in state of a disease, 33, 16. Sign good in sickness declining, 56,
88. Smell of urine whereof it gives best signification, 110. Squinsie, 62.
Slimy moisture, 31. Spermatike vessels slippery. 71. Spermatike vessels weak.
71. Spleen diseased, 22, 33, 42, 71, 94. Spleen pained, 90. Stomach cold,
12, 47. raw, 61. windy, ibid. Suppression of urine of what it gives best
signification, 110. Stone, 13, 35, 37, 43, 48, 63, 64, 65, 66, 63, 96, 99.
Stone in the bladder, 43, 61, 64, 66, 68. Stone in the reins, 43, 61, 63, 68.
Strangury, 40, 61, 63, 93, 95. Strangury mortal, vide death. Surfeiting, 12,
29. Sweat much, 48, 50. Swimming in the head, 30.
T
Tenasmus, 61. Tertian, 24, 33, 34, 37. 41, 52, 68. Thirst, 99. Tongue
scorched, 42. Turpentine eaten, 90.
V
Veins abounding with gross humours, 22. broken, 36, 55, 68, 96. diseased, 23.
obstructed, 13, 31. orifice opened, 67. thin, and full of pores, 68. too open,
36. too weak, 67, 96. widened, 36, 68. Veternus, 22. Ulcers, 9. Upbraidings,
13. Vomiting of blood, 70, Urine of which part it gives signification, 101,
102, 103. Urine how it is made in the body, ibid. Urine conduits obstructed,
13, 30, 58, 96. Urine instruments exulcerated, 35. Urine vessels benumbed.
Urine vessels exulcerated, 17, 61, 56 65, 66. Urine vessels to open, 15. Urine
vessels to weak, 12, 48, 98. Urine staying too long in the body, 37.
W
Want of matter, 50, 57. Wasting of the body, 28. Watching, 27, 33, 39, 50, 81.
Weakness of the body, 37. Weakness of the head, 88. Windines, 54, 78, 80, 83, 85,
90.
Y
Yard too open. 15. Yard exulcerated, 15.
FINIS.

