Democritus Platonissans, OR, AN ESSAY UPON THE INFINITY OF WORLDS OUT OF
PLATONIC PRINCIPLES. Hereunto is annexed CUPIDS CONFLICT together with THE
PHILOSOPHERS DEVOTION: And a Particular Interpretation appertaining to the
three last books of the Song of the Soul.

By H. More Master of Arts, and Fellow of Christs College in Cambridge.

(...)

Plat. Pythagoras Terram Planetam quendam esse censuit qui circa solemn in
centro mundi defixum converteretur. Pythagoram secuti sunt Philolaus, Seleucus,
Cleanthes, c. imo PLATO jam senex, ut narrat Theophrastus.

Libert. Fromond. de Orb terrae immobili. CAMBRIDGE Printed by ROGER DANIEL,
Printer to the UNIVERSITE. 1646.

To the Reader.
READER,
IF thou stand not to the judgement of thine eye more then of thy reason,
this fragment may pass favourably, though in the neglectful disguise of of a
fragment; if the strangeness of the argument prove no hinderance. INFINITY of
WORLDS! A thing monstrous if assented to, and to be startled at, especially by
them, whose thoughts this one have always so engaged, that they can find no
leisure to think of any thing else. But I only make a bare proposal to more
acute judgements, of what my sportful fancy, with pleasure hath suggested:
following my old design of furnishing men's minds with variety of
apprehensions concerning the most weighty points of Philosophie, that they may
not seem rashly to have settled in the truth, though it be the truth: a thing
as ill beseeming Philosophers, as hasty prejudicative sentence Political
Judges. But if I had relinquishd here my wonted self, in proving Dogmaticall, I
should have found very noble Patronage for the cause among the ancients,
Epicurus, Democritus, Lucretius, c. Or if justice may reach the dead, do them
the right, as to show, that though they be hooted at, by the Rout of the
learned, as men of monstrous conceits, they were either very wise or exceeding
fortunate to light on so probable and specious an opinion, in which
notwithstanding there is so much disficultie and seeming inconsistencie.

Nay and that sublime and subtle Mechanic too, Des-Chartes, though he seem to
mince it must hold infinitude of worlds, or which is as harsh one infinite one
For what is his mundus indefinite extensus, but extensus infinite? Else it
sounds only infinitus quoad nos but simpliciter finitus. But if any space be
left out unstuffd with Atoms, it will hazard the dissipation of the whole frame
of Nature into disjointed dust. As may be proved by the Principles of his own
Philosophie. And that there is space wherever God is, or any actual and
self-subsistent Being, seems to me no plainer then one of the (...).

For mine own part I must confess these apprehensions do plainly oppose what
heretofore I have conceived; but I have sworn more faithful friendship with
Truth then with my self. And therefore without all remorse lay battery against
mine own edifice: not sparing to show how weak that is, that my self now deems
not impregnably strong. I have at the latter end of the last Canto of
Psychathanasia, not without triumph concluded, that the world hath not
continued ab aeterno, from this ground: -- Extension
That's infinite implies a contradiction.
And this is in answer to an objection against my last argument of the souls
Immortality, viz. divine goodness. Which I there make the measure of his
providence. That ground limits the essence of the world as well as its
duration, and satisfies the curiosity of the Opposer, by showing the
incompossibilitie in the Creature, not want of goodness in the Creator to
have staid the framing of the Universe. But now roused up by a new Pbilosophick
fury, I answer that difficulty by taking away the Hypothesis of either the
world or time being finite: defending the infinitude of both. Which though I
had done with a great deal of vigour and life, and semblance of assent, it
would have agreed well enough with the free heat of Poefie, and might have
passed for a pleasant flourish: but the severity of my own judgement, and sad
Genius hath cast in many correctives and coolers into the Canto it self; so
that it cannot amount to more then a discussion. And discussion is no prejudice
but an honour to the truth: for then and never but then is she Victorious. And
what a glorious Trophy shall the finite world erect when it hath vanquished
the Infinite; a Pygmee a Giant.

For the better understanding of the connexion of this Appendix, with the Poem
of the souls Immortality; I have taken off the last stanza's thereof, and
added some few new ones to them for a more easy and natural leading to the
present Canto. Psychathan. lib. 3. Cant. 4.

Stanz. 33.
But thou who ere thou art that thus dost strive
With fierce assault my groundwork to subvert,
And boldly dost into Gods secrets dive,
Base fear my manly face note make m'avert.
In that odd question which thou first did stert,
I'll plainly prove thine incapacitie,
And force thy feeble feet back to revert,
That cannot climb so high a mystery,
I'll show thee strange perplexed inconsistencie.
34
Why was this world from all infinity
Not made? say thou: why? could it be so made
Say I. For well observe the sequencie:
If this Out-world continually hath wade
Through a long long-spun-time that never had
Beginning, then there as few circulings
Have been in the quick Moon as Saturn sad;
And still more plainly this clear truth to sing,
As many years as days or flitting hours have been.
35
For things that we conceive are infinite,
One the other no'te surpass in quantity.
So I have proved with clear convincing light,
This world could never from infinity
Been made. Certain deficiency
Doth always follow evolution:
Nought's infinite but tight eternity
Close thrust into it self: extension
That's infinite implies a contradiction.
36
So then for ought we know this world was made
So soon as such a Nature could exist;
And though that it continue, never fade,
Yet never will it be that that long twist
Of time prove infinite, though ner'e desist
From running still. But we may safely say
Time past compared with this long future list
Doth show as if the world but yesterday
Were made, and in due time Gods glory out may ray.
37
Then this short night and ignorant dull ages
Will quite be swallowed in oblivion;
And though this hope by many surly Sages
Be now derided, yet they'll all be gone
In a short time, like Bats and Owls yflone
At days approach. This will hap certainly
At this worlds shining conflagration.
Fayes, Satyrs, Goblins the night merrily
May spend, but ruddy Sol shall make them all to fly.
38
The roaring Lions and dread beasts of prey
Rule in the dark with piteous cruelty;
But harmless Man is master of the day,
Which doth his work in pure simplicity.
God bless his honest useful industry.
But pride and covetize, ambition,
Riot, revenge, self-love, hypocrisy,
Contempt of goodness, forced opinion;
These and such like do breed the worlds confusion.
39
But sooth to say though my triumphant Muse
Seems to vant as in got victory,
And with puissant stroke the head to bruize
Of her stiff fo, and daze his fantasy,
Captive his reason, dead each faculty:
Yet in her self so strong a force withstands
That of her self afraid, she'll not aby,
Nor keep the field. She'll fall by her own hand
As Ajax once laid Ajax dead upon the strand.
40
For thus her-self by her own self's opposed;
The Heavens the Earth the universal Frame
Of living Nature God so soon disclosed
As He could do, or she receive the same.
All times delay since that must turn to blame,
And what cannot He do that can be done?
And what might let but by the all-powerfull Name
Or Word of God, the Worlds Creation
More suddenly were made then mans swift thought can run?
41
Wherefore that Heavenly Power or is as young
As this Worlds date; or else some needless space
Of time was spent, before the Earth did clung
So close unto her-self and seas embrace
Her hollow breast, and if that time surpass
A finite number then Infinity
Of years before this Worlds Creation pass.
So that the durance of the Deity
We must contract or strait his full Benignity.
42
But for the cradle of the Cretian Jove,
And guardians of his vagient Infancy
What sober man but sagely will reprove*
Or drown the noise of the fond Dactyli
By laughter loud? Dated Divinity
Certes is but the dream of a dry brain*
God maimed in goodness, inconsistencie;
Wherefore my troubled mind is now in pain
Of a new birth, which this one Canto'll not contain.
Now Reader, thou art arrived to the Canto it self, from which I have kept thee
off by too tedious Preface and Apology, which is seldom made without
consciousnesse of some fault, which I profess I find not in my self, unless
this be it, that I am more tender of thy satisfaction then mine own credit. As
for that high sullen Poem, Cupids Conflict, I must leave it to thy candour and
favourable censure. The Philosophers Devotion I cast in only, that the latter
pages should not be unfurnished.

H. M.

Nihil tamen frequentius inter Autores occurrit, quam ut omnia adeo ex modulo
fere sensuum suorum aestiment, ut ea quae insuper infinitis rerum spatiis
extare possunt, sive superbe sive imprudenter rejiciant; ^ in usum suum
fabricata fuisse glorientur, perinde facientes ac si pediculi humanum caput,
aut pulices sinum muliebrem propter se solos condita existimarent, eaque demum
ex gradibus saltibusve suis metirentur.

The Lord Herbert in his De Causis Errorum. De generali totius hujus mundi
aspectabilis constructione ut recte Philosophemur duo sunt imprimis observanda:
Unum ut attendentes ad infinitam Dei potentiam bonitatem, no vereamur nimis
ampla pulchra absoluta ejus opera imaginari: sed e contra caveamus, no si quos
forte limits nobis non certo cognitos, in ipsis supponamus, non satis
magnifice de creatoris potentia sentire videamur.

Alterum, ut etiam caveamus, no nimis superbe de nobis ipsis sentiamus. Quod
fieret non modo, si quos limits nobis nulla cognitos ratione, nec divina
revelatione, mundo vellemus affingere, tanquam si vis nostra cogitationis,
ultra id quod a Deo revera factum est ferri posset; sed etiam maxim, si res
omnes propter nos solos, ab illo creatas esse fingeremus.

Renatus Des-Cartes in his Princip. Philosoph. the third part. Democritus
Platonissans.
THE ARGUMENT.
Against boundless time the objections made,
And wast infinity
Of worlds, are with new reasons weighed,
Men's judgements are left free.
1
HEnce, hence unhallowed ears and hearts more hard
Then Winter clods fast froze with Northern wind.
But most of all, foul tongue I thee discard
That blame all that thy dark strait'ned mind,
Can not conceive: But that no blame thou find;
What e're my pregnant Muse brings forth to light,
She'll not acknowledge to be of her kind,
Till Eagle-like she turn them to the sight
Of the eternal Word all decked with glory bright.
2
Strange sights do straggle in my restless thoughts,
And lively forms with orient colours clad
Walk in my boundless mind, as men ybrought
Into some spacious room, who when they 've had
A turn or two, go out, although unbad.
All these I see and know, but entertain
None to my friend but who's most sober sad;
Although the time my roof doth them contain
Their presence doth possess me till they out again
3
And thus possessed in silver trump I sound
Their guise, their shape, their gesture and array
But as in silver trumpet nought is found
When once the piercing sound is past away,
(Though while the mighty blast therein did stay,
Its tearing noise so terribly did shrill,
That it the heavens did shake, and earth dismay)
As empty I of what my flowing quill
In heedless hast elsewhere, or here, may hap to spill.
4
For 'tis of force and not of a set will.
No dare my wary mind afford assent
To what is placed above all mortal skill.
But yet our various thoughts to represent
Each genle wight will deem of good intent.
Wherefore with leave the infinity I'll sing
Of Time, Of Space: or without leave; I'm brent
With eager rage, my heart for joy doth spring,
And all my spirits move with pleasant trembeling.
5
An inward triumph doth my soul up-heave
And spread abroad through endless 'spersed air.
My nimble mind this clammie clod doth leave,
And lightly stepping on from star to star
Swifter then lightning, passes wide and far,
Measuring the unbounded Heavens and wasteful sky;
No ought she finds her passage to debar,
For still the azure Orb as she draws nigh
Gives back, new stars appear, the worlds walls before her fly.
6
For what can stand that is so badly staid?
Well may that fall whose ground-work is unsure.
And what hath walled the world but thoughts unweigh'd
In freer reason? That antiquate, secure,
And easy dull conceit of corporature,
Of matter, quantity, and such like gear
Hath made this needless, thankless enclosure,
Which I in full disdain quite up will tear
And lay all open, that as things are they may appear.
7
For other they appear from what they are
By reason that their Circulation
Cannot well represent entire from far
Each portion of the Cuspis of the Cone
(Whose nature is elsewhere more clearly shown)
I mean each globe, whether of glaring light
Or else opaque, of which the earth is one.
If circulation could them well transmit
Numb^s infinite of each would strike our 'stonishd sight;
8
All in just bigness and right colours dight
But total presence without all defect
Belongs only to that Trinity by right,
Ahad, Aeon, Psyche with all graces decked,
Whose nature well this riddle will detect;
A Circle whose circumference no where
Is circumscribed, whose Centre's each where set,
But the low Cusp's a figure circular,
Whose compass is ybound, but centre's every where.
9
Wherefore who'll judge the limits of the world
By what appears unto our failing sight
Appeals to sense, reason down headlong hurled
Out of her throne by giddy vulgar might.
But here base senses dictates they will dight
With specious title of Philosophie,
And stiffly will contend their cause is right
From rotten rolls of school antiquity,
Who constantly deny corporal Infinity.
10
But who can prove their corporalitie
Since matter which thereto's essential
If rightly sifted's but a fantasy.
And quantity who's deemed Original
Is matter, must with matter likewise fall.
What ever is, is Life and Energy
From God, who is the Original of all;
Who being everywhere doth multiply
His own broad shade that endless throughout all doth lie.
11
He from the last projection of light
Ycleep'd Shamajim, which is liquid fire
(It Ether eke and centrall Tasis hight)
Hath made each shining globe and clumperd mire
Of dimmer Orbs. For Nature doth inspire
Spermatick life, but of a different kind.
Hence those congenit splendour doth attire
And lively heat, these darkness dead doth bind,
And without borrowed rays they be both cold and blind.
12
All these be knots of the universal stole
Of sacred Psyche; which at first was fine,
Pure, thin, and pervious till hid powers did pull
Together in several points and did incline
The nearer parts in one clod to combine.
Those centrall spirits that the parts did draw
The measure of each globe did then define,
Made things impenetrable here below,
Gave colour, figure, motion, and each usual law.
13
And what is done in this Terrestrial star
The same is done in every Orb beside.
Each flaming Circle that we see from far
Is but a knot in Psyches garment tide.
From that lax shadow cast throughout the wide
And endless world, that low'st projection
Of universal life each thing's derived
What e're appears in corporeal fashion;
For body's but this spirit, fixed, gross by conspissation.
14
And that which doth conspissate active is;
Wherefore not matter but some living sprite
Of nimble Nature which this lower mist
And immense field of Atoms doth excite,
And wake into such life as best doth fit
With his own self. As we change fantasies
The essence of our soul not changed a whit,
So do these Atoms change their energies
Themselves unchanged into new Centreities.
15
And as our soul's not superficially
Coloured by phantasms, nor doth them reflect
As doth a looking-glasse such imag'rie
As it to the beholder doth detect:
No more are these lightly or smeared or decked
With form or motion which in them we see,
But from their inmost Centre they project
Their vital rays, not merely passive be,
But by occasion waked rouse up themselves on high.
16
So that they're life, form, sprite, not matter pure,
For matter pure is a pure nullitie,
What nought can act is nothing, I am sure;
And if all act, that is they'll not deny
But all that is is form: so easily
By what is true, and by what they embrace
For truth, their feigned Corporalitie
Will vanish into smoke, but on I'll pass,
More fully we have sung this in another place.
17
Wherefore more boldly now to represent
The nature of the world, how first things were
How now they are: This endless large Extent
Of lowest life (which I styled whileere
The Cuspis of the Cone that's every where)
Was first all dark, till in this spacious Hall
Hideous through silent horror torches clear
And lamping lights bright shining over all
Were set up in due distances proportional.
18
Innumerable numbers of fair Lamps
Were rightly ranged in this hollow hole,
To warm the world and chase the shady damps
Of immense darkness, rend her pitchy stole
Into short rags more dusty dim then coal.
Which pieces then in several were cast
(Abhorred relics of that vesture foul)
Upon the Globes that round those torches traced,
Which still fast on them stick for all they run so fast.
19
Such an one is that which mortal men call Night,
A little shred of that unbounded shade.
And such a Globe is that which Earth is hight;
By witless Wizzards the sole centre made
Of all the world, and on strong pillars staid.
And such a lamp or light is this our Sun,
Whose fiery beams the scorched Earth invade.
But infinite such as he, in heaven won,
And more then infinite Earths about those Suns do run;
20
And to speak out: though I detest the sect
Of Epicurus for their manners vile,
Yet what is true I may not well reject.
Truth's incorruptible, no can the style
Of vicious pen her sacred worth defile.
If we no more of truth should deign to embrace
Then what unworthy mouths did never soil,
No truths at all amongst men would finden place
But make them speedy wings and back to Heaven apace.
21
I will not say our world is infinite,
But that infinity of worlds there be.
The Centre of our world's the lively light
Of the warm sun, the visible Deity
Of this external Temple. Mercurie
Next placed and warmed more thoroughly by his rays,
Right nimbly about his golden head doth fly:
Then Venus nothing slow about him strayes,
And next our Earth though seeming sad full sprightly plays.
22
And after her Mars ranges in a round
With fiery locks and angry flaming eye,
And next to him mild Iupiter is found,
But Saturn cold one in our utmost sky.
The skirts of his large Kingdom surely lie
Near to the confines of some other worlds
Whose Centres are the fixed stars on high,
About which as their own proper Suns are hurled
Ioves, Earths and Saturns; round on their own axes twurld.
23
Little or nothing are those stars to us
Which in the azure Evening gay appear
(I mean for influence) but judicious
Nature and careful Providence her dear
And matchless work did so contrive whileere,
That the Hearts or Centres in the wide world pight
Should such a distance each to other bear,
That the dull Planets with collated light
By neighbour suns might cheered be in dampish night.
24
And as the Planets in our world (of which
The sun's the heart and kernel) do receive
Their nightly light from suns that do enrich
Their sable mantle with bright gems, and give
A goodly splendour, and sad men relieve
With their fair twinkling rays, so our worlds sun
Becomes a star elsewhere, and doth derive
Joint light with others, cheareth all that won
In those dim duskish Orbs round other suns that run.
25
This is is the parergon of each noble fire
Of neighbour worlds to be the nightly star,
But their main work is vital heat to inspire
Into the frigid spheres that about them fare,
Which of themselves quite dead and barren are.
But by the wakening warmth of kindly days,
And the sweet dewy nights they well declare
Their seminall virtue in due courses raise
Long hidden shapes and life, to their great Makers praise.
26
These with their suns I several worlds do call,
Whereof the number I deem infinite:
Else infinite darkness were in this great Hall
Of the endless Universe; For nothing finite
Could put that immense shadow unto flight.
But if that infinite Suns we shall admit,
Then infinite worlds follow in reason right.
For every Sun with Planets must be fit,
And have some mark for his farre-shining shafts to hit.
27
But if he shine all solitary, alone,
What mark is left,? what aimed scope or end
Of his existence? wherefore every one
Hath a due number of dim Orbs that wend
Around their centrall fire. But wrath will rend
This strange composure backed with reason stout.
And rasher tongues right speedily will spend
Their forward censure, that my wits run out
On wool-gathering, through infinite spaces all about.
28
What sober man will dare once to avouch
An infinite number of dispersed stars?
This one absurdity will make him crouch
And eat his words; Division nought impairs
The former whole, nor he augments that spares.
Strike every tenth out, that which doth remain,
An equal number with the former shares,
And let the tenth alone, the whole nought doth gain,
For infinite to infinite is ever the same.
29
The tenth is infinite as the other nine,
Or else nor they, nor all the ten entire
Are infinite. Thus one infinite doth adjoin
Others unto it and still rises higher.
And if those single lights hither aspire,
This strange prodigious inconsistencie
Grows still stranger, if each fixed fire
(I mean each star) prove Suns, and Planets fly
About their flaming heads amid the thronged sky.
30
For whatsoever that their number be
Whether by seavens, or eighths, or fives, or nines,
They round each fixed lamp; Infinity
Will be redoubled thus by many times.
Besides each greater Planet the attendance finds
Of lesser. Our Earths handmaid is the Moon,
Which to her darkened side right duly shines,
And Jove hath four, as hath been said aboven,
And Saturn more then four if the plain truth were known.
31
And if these globes be regions of life
And several kinds of plants therein do grow,
Grass, flowers, herbs, trees, which the impartial knife
Of all consuming Time still down doth mow,
And new again doth in succession show:
Which also 's done in flies, birds, men and beasts;
Add sand, pearls, pebbles, that the ground do strew
Leaves, quills, hairs, thorns, blooms, you may think the rest
Their kinds by mortal pen can not well be expressed:
32
And if their kinds no man may reckon well,
The sum of successive particulars
No mind conceive nor tongue can ever tell.
And yet this mist of numbers (as appears)
Belongs to one of these opacous spears.
Suppose this Earth; what then will all those Rounds
Produce? No Atlas such a load upbears.
In this huge endless heap o'rewhelmed, drowned,
Choked, stifled, lo! I lie, breathless, even quite confound.
33
Yet give me space a while but to respire,
And I my self shall fairly well out-wind;
Keep this position true, unhurt, entire,
That you no greater difficulty find
In this new old opinion here defined
Of infinite worlds, then one world doth imply.
For if we do with steady patience mind
All is resolved int' one absurdity,
The grant of something greater then infinity.
34
That God is infinite all men confess,
And that the Creature is some realty
Besides Gods self, though infinitely less.
Join now the world unto the Deity.
What? is there added no more entitie
By this conjunction, then there was before?
Is the broad breasted earth? the spacious sky
Spangled with silver light, and burning Ore?
And the wide bellowing seas, whose boiling billows roar,
35
Are all these nothing? But you will reply;
As is the question so we ought restrain
Our answer unto Corporeity.
But that the fantasy of the body 's vain
I did before unto you maken plain.
But that no man depart unsatisfied
A while this Universe here will we feign
Corporeal, till we have gainly tried,
If ought that's bodily may infinite abide.
36
What makes a body saving quantity?
What quantity unless extension?
Extension if 't admit infinity
Bodies admit boundless dimension.
That some extension forward on doth run
Withouten limits, endless, infinite
Is plane from Space, that ever paces on
Unstop'd, unstaid, till it have filled quite
That immense infinite Orb where God himself doth sit.
37
But yet more sensibly this truth to show
If space be ended set upon that end
Some strong armed Archer with his Parthian bow,
That from that place with speedy force may send
His fleeter shafts, and so still forward wend.
Where? When shall he want room his strength to try?
But here perversely subtle you 'l contend
Nothing can move in mere vacuity,
And space is nought, so not extended properly.
38
To solve these knots I must call down from high
Some heavenly help, feather with angels wing
The sluggish arrow. If it will not fly,
Sent out from bow stiff-bent with even string,
Let angels on their backs it thither bring
Where you free mind appointed had before,
And then hold on, till in your travelling
You be well wearied, finding ever more
Free passage for their flight, and what they flying bore.
39
Now to that shift that says Vacuity
Is nought, and therefore not at all extent
We answer thus: There is a distancy
In empty space, though we be well content
To balk that question (for we never meant
Such needless niceties) whether that it be
A real being; yet that there's parts distent
One from another, no mans fantasy
Can e're reject if well he weigh't and warily.
40
For now conceive the air and azure sky
All swept away from Saturn to the Sun,
Which eath is to be wrought by him on high.
Then in this place let all the Planets run
(As erst they did before this feat was done)
If not by nature, yet by divine power,
No one hairs breadth their former circuits shun
And still for fuller proof, the Astronomer
Observe their heights as in the empty heavens they scour.
41
Will then their Parallaxes prove all one
Or none, or different still as before?
If so, their distances by mortal men
Must be acknowledged such as were of yore,
Measured by leagues, miles, stades, nor less nor more
From circuit unto circuit shall be fouud
Then was before the sweeping of the floor.
That distance therefore hath most certain ground
In emptiness we may conclude with reason sound.
42
If distance now so certainly attend
All emptiness (as also mensuration
Attends distance) distance without end
Is wide dispersed above imagination
(For emptiness is void of limitation)
And this unbounded voidnesse doth admit
The least and greatest measures application;
The number thus of the greatest that doth fit
This infinite void space is likewise infinite.
43
But what so e're that infinite number be,
A lesser number will a number give
So far exceeding in infinity
That number as this measure we conceive
To fall short of the other. But I'll leave
This present way and a new course will try
Which at the same mark doth as fully drive
And with a great deal more facility.
Look on this endless Space as one whole quantity.
44
Which in your mind int' equal parts divide,
Tens, hundreds, thousands or what pleases best.
Each part denominate doth still abide
An infinite portion, else nor all the rest
Makes one infinitude.
For if one thousandth part may be defined
By finite measures eas'ly well expressed,
A myriad suppose of miles assigned
Then to a thousand myriads is the whole confined.
45
Wherefore this wide and wast Vacuity,
Which endless is outstretched thorough all,
And lies even equal with the Deity,
Nor is a thing merely imaginall,
(For it doth far men's fantasies forestall
Nothing beholden to our devicefull thought)
This inf'nite voidnesse as much our mind doth gall,
And has as great perplexities ybrought
As if this empty space with bodies were yfraught.
46
Nor have we yet the face once to deny
But that it is, although we mind it not;
For all once minded such perplexity
It doth create to puzzled reason, that
She says and unsayes, does she knows not what.
Why then should we the worlds infinity
Misdoubt, because when as we contemplate
Its nature, such strange inconsistency
And unexpected sequels, we therein descry?
47
Who dare gainsay but God is every where
Unbounded, measureless, all infinite;
Yet the same difficulties meet us here
Which erst us met and did so sore affright
With their strange vizards. This will follow right
Where ever we admit infinity
Every denominated part proves straight
A portion infinite, which if it be,
One infinite will into myriads multiply.
48
But with new argument to draw more near
Our purposed end. If God's omnipotent
And this omnipotent God be every where,
Where e're he is then can he eas'ly vent
His mighty virtue thorough all extent.
What then shall hinder but a roscid air
With gentle heat each where be 'sperst and sprent.
Unless omnipotent power we will empair,
And say that empty space his working can debar.
49
Where now this one supposed world is pight
Was not that space at first all vain and void?
Nor ought said; no, when he said, Let it be light.
Was this one space better then all beside,
And more obedient to what God decreed?
Or would not all that endless emptiness
Gladly embraced (if he had ever tried)
His just command? and what might come to pass
Implies no contradictious inconsistentnesse.
50
Wherefore this precious sweet Ethereal dew
For ought we know God each where did distill,
And thorough all that hollow voidnesse threw
And the wide gaping drought therewith did fill,
His endless overflowing goodness spill
In every place; which straight he did contrive
Int' infinite several worlds, as his best skill
Did him direct and creatures could receive
For matter infinite needs infinite worlds must give.
51
The Centre of each several world's a sun
With shining beams and kindly warming heat,
About whose radiant crown the Planets run,
Like reeling moths around a candle light.
These all together, one world I conceit.
And that even infinite such worlds there be,
That inexhausted Good that God is hight
A full sufficient reason is to me,
Who simple Goodness make the highest Deity,
52
Als make himself the key of all his works
And eke the measure of his providence;
The piercing eye of truth to whom nought lurks
But lies wide open unbar'd of all pretense.
But frozen hearts! away! fly far from hence,
Unless you'll thaw at this celestial fire
And melt into one mind and holy sense
With Him that doth all heavenly hearts inspire,
So may you with my soul in one assent conspire.
53
But what's within, uneath is to convey
To narrow vessels that are full before.
And yet this truth as wisely as I may
I will insinuate, from senses store
Borrowing a little aid. Tell me therefore
When you behold with your admiring eyes
Heavens Canopy all to bespangled over
With sprinkled stars, what can you well devize
Which causen may such careless order in the skies?
54
A peck of peasen rudely poured out
On plaster flore, from hasty heedless hond
Which lie all careless scattered about,
To sight do in as seemly order stond,
As those fair glistering lights in heaven are found.
If only for this world they were intended,
Nature would have adorned this azure round
With better art, and easily have mended
This harsh disord'red order, and more beauty lended.
55
But though these lights do seem so rudely thrown
And scattered throughout the spacious sky,
Yet each most seemly sits in his own Throne
In distance due and comely Majesty;
And round their lordly seats their servants hie
Keeping a well-proportionated space
One from another, doing cheerfully
Their daily task. No blemmish may deface
The worlds in several decked with all art and grace.
56
But the appearance of the nightly stars
Is but the by-work of each neighbour sun;
Wherefore less marvel if it lightly shares
Of neater Art; and what proportion
Were fittest for to distance one from one
(Each world I mean from other) is not clear.
Wherefore it must remain as yet unknown
Why such perplexed distances appear
Amongst the dispersed lights in Heaven thrown here there.
57
Again, that eminent similitude
Betwixt the stars and Phoebus fixed light,
They being both with steadiness endued,
No whit removing whence they first were pight,
No serious man will count a reason slight
To prove them both, both fixed suns and stars
And Centres all of several worlds by right,
For right it is that none a sun debar
Of Planets which his just and due retinue are.
58
If stars be merely stars not centrall lights
Why swell they into so huge bignesses?
For many (as Astronomers do write)
Our sun in bigness many times surpass.
If both their number and their bulks were less
Yet lower placed, light and influence
Would flow as powerfully, and the bosom press
Of the impregned Earth, that fruit from hence
As fully would arise, and lordly affluence.
59
Wherefore these fixed Fires mainly attend
Their proper charge in their own Universe,
And only by the by of curtsy lend
Light to our world, as our world doth reverse
His thankful rays so far as he can pierce
Back unto other worlds. But far aboven
Further then furthest thought of man can traverse,
Still are new worlds aboven and still aboven,
In the endless hollow Heaven, and each world hath his sun.
60
An hint of this we have in winter-nights,
When reason may see clearer then our eye,
Small subtle stars appear unto our sights
As thick as pin-dust scattered in the sky.
Here we accuse our seeing faculty
Of weakness, and our sense of foul deceit,
We do accuse and yet we know not why.
But the plain truth is, from a vaster hight
The numerous upper worlds amaze our dazzled sight.
61
Now since so far as sense can ever try
We find new worlds, that still new worlds there be,
And round about in infinite numbers lie,
Further then reach of mans weak fantasy
(Without suspicion of temerity)
We may conclude; as well as men conclude
That there is air far bove the mountains high,
Or that th'Earth a sad substance doth include
Even to the Centre with like qualities endued.
62
For who did ever the Earths Centre pierce,
And felt or sand or gravel with his spade
At such a depth? what Histories rehearse
That ever wight did dare for to invade
Her bowels but one mile in dampish shade?
Yet I'll be bold to say that few or none
But deem this globe even to the bottom made
Of solid earth, and that her nature's one
Throughout, though plain experience hath it never shown.
63
But since sad earth so far as they have gone
They still descry, eas'ly they do infer
Without all check of reason, were they down
Never so deep, like substance would appear,
No dream of any hollow horror there.
My mind with like uncurbed facility
Concludes from what by sight is seen so clear
That there's no barren wast vacuitie
Above the worlds we see, but still new worlds there lie,
64
And still and still even to infinity.
Which point since I so fitly have proposed,
Abating well the inconsistencie
Of harsh infinitude therein supposed
And proved by reasons never to be loosed
That infinite space and infinite worlds there be;
This load laid down, I'm freely now disposed
A while to sing of times infinity,
May infinite Time afford me but his smallest fee.
65
For smallest fee of time will serve my turn
This part for to dispatch, since endless space
(Whose perplexed nature well mans brains might turn,
And weary wits disorder and misplace)
I have already passed: for like case
Is in them both. He that can well untie
The knots that in those infinite worlds found place,
May easily answer each perplexity
Of these worlds infinite matters endless durancie.
66
The Cuspis and the Basis of the Cone
Were both at once dispersed every where;
But the pure Basis that is God alone:
Else would remotest sights as big appear
Unto our eyes as if we stood them near.
And if an Harper harped in the Moon,
His silver sound would touch our tickled ear:
Or if one hollowed from highest Heaven aboven,
In sweet still Evening-tide, his voice would hither roam.
67
This all would be if the Cuspe of the Cone
Were very God. Wherefore I rightly 't deem
Only a Creaturall projection,
Which flowing yet from God hath ever been,
Filled the vast empty space with its large streem.
But yet it is not total every where
As was even now by reason rightly seen:
Wherefore not God, whose nature doth appear
Entirely omnipresent, weighed with judgement clear.
68
A real infinite matter, distinct
And yet proceeding from the Deity
Although with different form as then untinct
Has ever been from all Eternity.
Now what delay can we suppose to be,
Since matter always was at hand prepared
Before the filling of the boundless sky
With framed Worlds; for nought at all debarred, (paired.
Nor was His strength ungrown, nor was His strength em-
69
How long would God be forming of a fly?
Or the small wandering moats that play in the sun?
Least moment well will serve none can deny,
His Fiat spoke and straight the thing is done.
And cannot He make all the World as soon?
For in each Atom of the matter wide
The total Deity doth entirely won,
His infinite presence doth therein reside,
And in this presence infinite powers do ever abide.
70
Wherefore at once from all eternity
The infinite number of these Worlds He made,
And will conserve to all infinity,
And still drive on their ever-moving trade,
And steady hold what ever must be staid;
No must one mite be minish'd of the sum,
No must the smallest atom ever fade,
But still remain though it may change its room;
This truth abides strong from everlasting doom.
71
No fear I what hard sequel after-wit
Will draw upon me; that the number's one
Of years, months, days, hours, and of minutes fleet
Which from eternity have still run on.
I plainly did confess awhile agone
That be it what it will that's infinite
More infinites will follow thereupon,
But that all infinites do justly fit
And equal be, my reason did not yet admit.
72
But as my emboldened mind, I know not how,
In empty Space and pregnant Deity
Endless infinitude dares to allow,
Though it begets the like perplexity:
So now my soul drunk with Divinity,
And born away above her usual bounds
With confidence concludes infinity
Of Time of Worlds, of fiery flaming Rounds;
Which sight in sober mood my spirits quite confounds.
73
And now I do awhile but interspire
A torrent of objections against me beat,
My boldness to repress and strength to tire.
But I will wipe them off like summer sweat,
And make their streams straight back again retreat.
If that these worlds, say they, were ever made
From infinite time, how comes 't to pass that yet
Art is not perfected, nor metalls fade,
Nor mines of grimie coal low-hid in grisly shade.
74
But the remembrance of the ancient Flood
With ease will wash such arguments away.
Wherefore with greater might I am withstood.
The strongest stroke wherewith they can assay
To vanquish me is this; The Date or Day
Of the created World, which all admit;
Nor may my modest Muse this truth gainsay
In holy Oracles so plainly writ.
Wherefore the Worlds continuance is not infinite.
75
Now lend me, Origin! a little wit
This sturdy stroke right fairly to avoid,
Lest that my rasher rymes, while they ill fit
With Moses pen, men justly may deride
And well accuse of ignorance or pride.
But thou, O holy Sage! with piercing sight
Who readst those sacred rolls, and hast well tried
With searching eye thereto what fitteth right
Thy self of former Worlds right learnedly dost write:
76
To weet that long ago there Earths have been
Peopled with men and beasts before this Earth,
And after this shall others be again
And other beasts and other humane birth.
Which once admit, no strength that reason bear'th
Of this worlds Date and Adams efformation,
Another Adam once received breath
And still another in endless repedation,
And this must perish once by final conflagration.
77
Witness ye Heavens if what I say's not true,
Ye flaming Comets wandering on high,
And new fixed stars found in that Circle blue,
The one espied in glittering Cassiopie,
The other near to Opbiuchus thigh.
Both bigger then the biggest stars that are,
And yet as far removed from mortal eye
As are the furthest, so those Arts declare
Unto whose reaching sight Heavens mysteries lie bare.
78
Wherefore these new-seen lights were greater once
By many thousand times then this our sphere
Wherein we live, 'twixt good and evil chance.
Which to my musing mind doth strange appear
If those large bodies then first shaped were.
For should so goodly things so soon decay?
Neither did last the full space of two year.
Wherefore I cannot deem that their first day
Of being, when to us they sent out shining ray.
79
But that they were created both of old,
And each in his due time did fair display
Themselves in radiant locks more bright then gold,
Or silver sheen purged from all drossy clay.
But how they could themselves in this array
Expose to humane sight, who did before
Lie hid, is that which well amazen may
The wisest man and puzzle evermore:
Yet my unwearied thoughts this search could not give over.
80
Which when I'd exercised in long pursuit
To finden out what might the best agree
With wary reason, at last I did conclude
That there's no better probability
Can be produced of that strange prodigy,
But that some mighty Planet that doth run
About some fixed star in Cassiopie
As Saturn paces round about our Sun,
Unusual light and bigness by strange fate had won.
81
Which I conceive no gainer way is done
Then by the seizing of devouring fire
On that dark Orb, which before but dimly shone
With borrowed light, not lightened entire,
But halfed like the Moon.
And while the busy flame did fieze throughout,
And search the bovvels of the lowest mire
Of that Saturnian Earth; a mist broke out,
And immense mounting smoke arose all round about.
82
Which being gilded with the piercing rays
Of its own sun and every neighbour star,
It soon appeared with shining silver blaze,
And then began first be seen of men from far.
Besides that fiery flame that was so narre
The Planets self, which greedily did eat
The wastning mold, did contribute a share
Unto this brightness; and what I conceit
Of this star doth with that of Ophiuchus fit.
83
And like I would adventure to pronounce
Of all the Comets that above the Moon,
Amidst the higher Planets rudely dance
In course perplex, but that from this rash doom
I'm bett off by their beards and tails far strown
Along the sky, pointing still opposite
Unto the sun, however they may roam;
Wherefore a cluster of small stars unite
These meteors some do deem, perhaps with judgement right.
84
And that these tails are streams of the suns light
Breaking through their near bodies as through clouds.
Besides the Optic glass has shown to sight
The dissolution of these starry crowds.
Which thing if it once be granted and allow'd,
I think without all contradiction
They may conclude these Meteors are routs
Of wandering stars, which though they one by one
Cannot be seen, yet joined, cause this strange vision.
85
And yet methinks, in my devicefull mind
Some reasons that may happily repress
These arguments it's not uneath to find.
For how can the suns rays that be transmisse
Through these loose knots in Comets, well express
Their beards or curled tails utmost incurvation?
Beside, the conflux and congeries
Of lesser lights a double augmentation
Implies, and 'twixt them both a lessening coarctation.
86
For when as once these stars are come so nigh
As to seem one, the Comet must appear
In biggest show, because more loose they lie
Somewhat spread out, but as they draw more near
The compass of his head away must wear,
Till he be brought to his least magnitude;
And then they passing cross, he doth repair
Himself, and still from his last loss renewed
Grows till he reach the measure which we first had viewed.
87
And then far distanced they bid quite adieu,
Each holding on in solitude his way.
No any footsteps in the empty Blew
Is to be found of that farre-shining ray.
Which process since no man did yet bewray,
It seems unlikely that the Comets be
Synods of stars that in wide Heaven stray.
Their smallness eke and numerositie
Increases doubt and lessens probability.
88
A cluster of them makes not half a Moon,
What should such tennis-balls do in the sky?
And few 'll not figure out the fashion
Of those round fiery meteors on high.
No ought their beards much move us, that do lie
Ever cast forward from the Morning sun,
Nor back cast tails turned to our Evening-eye,
That fair appear when as the day is done.
This matter may lie hid in the stars shadowed Cone.
89
For in these Planets conflagration,
Although the smoke mount up exactly round,
Yet by the suns irradiation
Made thin and subtle no where else its found
By sight, save in the dim and duskish bound
Of the projected Pyramid opaque,
Opaque with darkness, smoke and mists unsound.
Yet gilded like a foggy cloud doth make
Reflection of fair light that doth our senses take.
90
This is the reason of that constant site
Of Comets tails and beards: And that their show's
Not pure Pyramidall, nor their ends seem straight
But bowed like brooms, is from the winds that blow,
I mean Ethereal winds, such as below
Men finden under the Equinoctial line.
Their widend beards this air so broad doth strew
Incurvate, and or more or less decline:
If not, let sharper wits more subtly here divine.
91
But that experiment of the Optic glass
The greatest argument of all I deem,
No can I well encounter nor let pass
So strong a reason if I may esteem
The feat withouten fallacy to been,
Nor judge these little sparks and subtle lights
Some ancient fixed stars though now first seen,
That near the ruined Comets place were pight,
On which that Optic instrument by chance did light.
92
Nor finally an uncouth after-sport
Of the immense vapours that the searching fire
Had boiled out, which now themselves consort
In several parts and closely do conspire,
Clumper'd in balls of clouds and globes entire
Of crudled smoke and heavy clunging mists;
Which when they've staid a while at last expire;
But while they stay any may see that lists
So be that Optic Art his natural sight assists.
93
If none of these ways I may well decline
The urging weight of this hard argument,
Worst is but parting stakes and thus define:
Some Comets be but single Planets brent,
Others a synod joined in due consent:
And that no new found Meteors they are.
No further may my wary mind assent
From one single experience solitaire,
Till all-discovering Time shall further truth declare.
94
But for the new fixed stars there's no pretence,
Nor beard nor tail to take occasion by,
To bring in that unlucky inference
Which weaken might this new built mystery.
Certes in raging fire they both did fry.
A sign whereof you rightly may aread
Their colours changeable variety
First clear and white, then yellow, after red,
Then blewly pale, then duller still, till perfect dead.
95
And as the order of these colours went,
So still decreased that Cassiopean star,
Till at the length to sight it was quite spent:
Which observations strong reasons are,
Consuming fire its body did empare
And turn to ashes. And the like will be
In all the darksome Planets wide and far.
No can our Earth from this state standen free
A Planet as the rest, and Planets fate must try.
96
No let the tender heart too harshly deem
Of this rude sentence: for what rigour more
Is in consuming fire then drowning stream
Of Noahs flood which all creaturs choked of yore,
Saving those few that were kept safe in store
In that well builded ship? All else beside
Men, birds, and beasts, the lion, buck, and bore
Dogs, kine, sheep, horses all that did abide
Upon the spacious earth, perished in waters wide.
97
Nor let the slow and misbelieving wight
Doubt how the fire on the hard earth may seize;
No more then how those waters erst did light
Upon the sinful world. For as the seas
Boiling with swelling waves aloft did rise,
And met with mighty showers and pouring rain
From Heavens spouts; so the broad flashing skies
Thickened with brimstone and clouds of fiery bain
Shall meet with raging Etna's and Vesuvius flame.
98
The burning bowels of this wasting ball
Shall gullup up great flakes of rolling fire,
And belch out pitchy flames, till over all
Having long raged, Vulcan himself shall tire
And (the earth an ashheap made) shall then expire.
Here Nature laid asleep in her own Urn
With gentle rest right easly will respire,
Till to her pristine task she do return
As fresh as Phoenix young under the Arabian Morn.
99
O happy they that then the first are born,
While yet the world is in her vernal pride:
For old corruption quite away is worn
As metal pure so is her mold well tried.
Sweet dews, cool-breathing airs, and spaces wide
Of precious spicery wafted with soft wind:
Fair comely bodies goodly beautified
Snow-limb'd, rose-cheek'd, ruby-lip'd, pearl-ted, star eyn'd
Their parts each fair in fit proportion all conbin'd.
100
For all the while her purged ashes rest
These rellicks dry suck in the heavenly dew,
And roscid Manna rains upon her breast,
And fills with sacred milk sweet fresh and new,
Where all take life and doth the world renew;
And then renewed with pleasure be yfed.
A green soft mantle doth her bosom strew
With fragrant herbs and flowers embellished,
Where without fault or shame all living creatures bed.
101
No ought we doubt how Nature may recover
In her own ashes long time buried.
For nought can ever consume that centrall power
Of hid spermatick life, which lies not dead
In that rude heap, but safely covered;
And doth by secret force suck from above
Sweet heavenly juice, and therewith nourished
Till her just bulk, she doth her life emprove,
Made mother of much children that about her move.
102
Witness that uncouth bird of Arabie
Which out of her own ruins doth revive
With all the exploits of skilful Chemistry,
Such as no vnlgar wit can well believe.
Let universal Nature witness give
That what I sing's no feigned forgery.
A needless task new fables to contrive,
But what I sing is seemly verity
Well suiting with right reason and Philosophie.
103
But the fit time of this mutation
No man can finden out with all his pains.
For the small spears of humane reason run
Too swift within his narrow compassed brains.
But that vast Orb of Providence contains
A wider period; turns still and slow.
Yet at the last his aimed end he gains.
And sure at last a fire will overflow
The aged Earth, and all must into ashes go.
104
Then all the stately works and monuments
Built on this bottom shall to ruin fall.
And all those goodly statues shall be brent
Which were erect to the memorial
Of Kings Kaesars, no may better 'fall
The boastfull works of brave Poetic pride
That promise life and fame perpetual;
No better fate may these poor lines abide.
Betide what will to what may live no longer tide!
105
This is the course that never-dying Nature
Might ever hold from all Eternity,
Renewing still the faint decayed creature
Which would grow stark and dry as aged tree,
Unless by wise preventing Destiny
She were at certain periods of years
Reduced back unto her Infancy,
Which well framed argument (as plain appears)
My ship from those hard rocks and shelves right safely stears.
106
Lo! now my faithful muse hath represented
Both frames of Providence to open view,
And hath each point in orient colours painted
Not to deceive the sight with seeming show
But earnest to give either part their due;
Now urging the uncouth strange perplexity
Of infinite worlds and Time, then of a new
Softening that harsher inconsistencie
To fit the immense goodness of the Deity.
107
And here by curious men 't may be expected
That I this knot with judgement grave decide,
And then proceed to what else was objected.
But, ah! What mortal wit may dare to areed
Heavens counsels in eternal horror hid?
And Cynthius pulls me by my tender ear
Such signs I must observe with wary heed:
Wherefore my restless Muse at length forbear.
Thy silver sounded Lute hang up in silence here.
FINIS
Cupids Conflict.
Mela. Cleanthes. Cl. MEla my dear! why been thy looks so sad
As if thy gentle heart were sunk with care?
Impart thy case; for be it good or bad
Friendship in either will bear equal share.

Mel. Not so; Cleanthes, for if bad it be
My self must bleed afresh by wounding thee.
But what it is, my slow, uncertain wit
Cannot well judge. But thou shalt sentence give
How manfully of late my self I quit,
When with that lordly lad by chance I strive.

Cl. Of friendship Mela! let's that story hear.

Mel. Sit down Cleanthes then, and lend thine ear.
Upon a day as best did please my mind
Walking abroad amidst the verdant field
Scattering my careful thoughts in the wanton wind
The pleasure of my path so far had till'd
My feeble feet that without timely rest
Uneath it were to reach my wonted nest.
In secret shade far moved from mortals sight
In lowly dale my wandering limbs I laid
On the cool grass where Natures pregnant wit
A goodly bower of thickest trees had made.
Amongst the leaves the cheerful birds did fare
And sweetly carrol'd to the echoing air.
Hard at my feet ran down a crystal spring
Which did the cumbrous pebbles hoarsely chide
For standing in the way. Though murmuring
The broken stream his course did rightly guide
And strongly pressing forward with disdain
The grassy flore divided into twain.
The place a while did feed my foolish eye
As being new, and eke mine idle ear
Did listen oft to that wild harmony
And oft my curious fancy would compare
How well agreed the Brooks low muttering Base,
With the birds trebbles pearch'd on higher place.
But senses objects soon do glut the soul,
Or rather weary with their emptiness;
So I, all heedless how the waters roll
And mindless of the mirth the birds express,
Into my self 'gin softly to retire
After hid heavenly pleasures to enquire.
While I this enterprise do entertain;
Lo! on the other side in thickest bushes
A mighty noise! with that a naked swain
With blew and purple wings straight rudely rushes.
He leaps down light upon the flowery green,
Like sight before mine eyes had never seen.
At's snowy back the boy a quiver wore
Right fairly wrought and gilded all with gold.
A silver bow in his left hand he bore,
And in his right a ready shaft did hold.
Thus armed stood he and betwixt us tway
The labouring brook did break his toilsome way.
The wanton lad whose sport is others pain
Did charge his bended bow with deadly dart,
And drawing to the head with might and main,
With fell intent he aimed to hit my heart.
But ever as he shot his arrows still
In their mid course dropped down into the rill.
Of wondrous virtues that in waters been
Is needless to rehearse, all books do ring
Of those strange rarities. But ne'er was seen
Such virtue as resided in this spring.
The novelty did make me much admire
But stirred the hasty youth to rageful ire.
As heedless fowls that take their per'lous flight
Over that bane of birds, Averno lake,
Do drop down dead: so dead his shafts did light
Amid this stream, which presently did slake
Their fiery points, and all their feathers wet
Which made the youngster Godling inly fret.
Thus lustful Love (this was that love I when)
Was wholly changed to consuming ire.
And eath it was, fifth they're so near a kin
They be both born of one rebellious fire.
But he suppressed his wrath and by and by
For feathered darts, he winged words let fly.
Vain man! said he, and would thou wer'st not vain
That hid'st thy self in solitary shade
And spil'st thy precious youth in sad disdain
Hating this lifes delight! Hath God thee made
Part of this world, and wilt not thou partake
Of this worlds pleasure for its makers sake?
Unthankful wretch! Gods gifts thus to reject
And maken nought of Natures goodly dower
That milders still away through thy neglect
And dying fades like unregarded flower.
This life is good, what's good thou must improve,
The highest improvement of this life is love.
Had I (but O that envious Destiny,
Or Stygian vow, or thrice accursed charm
Should in this place free passage thus deny
Unto my shafts as messengers of harm!
Had I but once transfixed thy froward breast,
How would thou then -- I staid not for the rest;
But thus half angry to the boy replied:
How would thou then my soul of sense bereave!
I blinded, thee more blind should choose my guide!
How would thou then my muddied mind deceive
With fading shows, that in my error vile,
Base lust, I love should term, vice, virtue stile.
How should my wicked rymes then idolize
Thy wretched power, and with impious wit
Impute thy base born passions to the skies
And my souls sickness count an heavenly fit,
My weakness strength, my wisdom to be caught
My bane my bliss, mine ease to be o'rewraught.
How often through my fondly feigning mind
And frantic fancy, in my Mistress eye
Should I a thousand fluttering Cupids find
Bathing their busy wings? How oft epsy
Under the shadow of her eye-brows fair
Ten thousand Graces sit all naked bare?
Thus haunted should I be with such feat fiends:
A pretty madness were my portion due.
Foolish my self I would not hear my friends.
Should deem the true for false, the false for true.
My way all dark more slippery then ice
My attendants, anger, pride, and jealousies.
Unthankful then to God I should neglect
All the whole world for one poor sorry wight,
Whose pestilent eye into my heart project
Would burn like poisonous Comet in my spright.
Aye me! how dismal then would prove that day
Whose only light sprang from so fatal ray.
Who seeks for pleasure in this mortal life
By diving deep into the body base
Shall loose true pleasure: But who gainly strive
Their sinking soul above this bulk to place
Enlarged delight they certainly shall find
Unbounded joys to fill their boundless mind.
When I my self from mine own self do quit
And each thing else; then an all-spreaden love
To the vast Universe my soul doth fit
Makes me half equal to all-seeing Jove.
My mighty wings high stretched then clapping light
I brush the stars and make them shine more bright.
Then all the works of God with close embrace
I dearly hug in my enlarged arms
All the hid paths of heavenly Love I trace
And boldly listen to his secret charms.
Then clearly view I where true light doth rise,
And where eternal Night low-pressed lies.
Thus lose I not by leaving small delight
But gain more joy, while I my self suspend
From this and that; for then with all unite
I all enjoy, and love that love commends.
That all is more then loves the partial soul
Whose petty loves the impartial fates control.
Ah fon! said he, (and laughed very loud)
That trickst thy tongue with uncouth strange disguise,
Extolling highly that with speeches proud
To mortal men that humane state denies,
And rashly blaming what thou never knew
Let men experienced speak, if they'll speak true.
Had I once lanc'd thy froward flinty heart
And cruddled blood had thawn with living fire
And pricked thy drowsy sprite with gentle smart
How would thou wake to kindly sweet desire,
Thy soul filled up with overflowing pleasures
Would dew thy lips with hony-dropping measures.
Then would thou carol loud and sweetly sing
In honour of my sacred Deity
That all the woods and hollow hills would ring
Reechoing thy heavenly harmony.
And eke the hardy rocks with full rebounds
Would faithfully return thy silver sounds.
Next unto me would be thy Mistress fair,
Whom thou might setten out with goodly skill
Her peerless beauty and her virtues rare,
That all would wonder at thy graceful quill.
And lastly in us both thy self should raise
And crown thy temples with immortal baize.
But now thy riddles all men do neglect,
Thy rugged lines of all do lie forlorn.
Unwelcome rymes that rudely do detect
The Readers ignorance. Men holden scorn
To be so often non-plusd or to spell,
And on one stanza a whole age to dwell.
Besides this harsh and hard obscurity
Of the hid sense, thy words are barbarous
And strangely new, and yet too frequently
Return, as usual plain and obvious,
So that the show of the new thick-set patch
Mars all the old with which it ill doth match.
But if thy haughty mind, forsooth, would deign
To stoop so low to hearken to my lore,
Then would thou with trim lovers not disdeign
To adorn the outside, set the best before.
Nor rub nor wrinkle would thy verses spoil
Thy rymes should run as glib and smooth as oil.
If that be all, said I, thy reasons slight
Can never move my well establishd mind.
Full well I wot always the present sprite,
Or life that doth possess the soul, doth blind,
Shutting the windows against broad open day
Lest fairer sights its ugliness bewray.
The soul then loves that disposition best
Because no better comes unto her view.
The drunkard drunkenness, the sluggard rest,
The Ambitious honour and obeisance due.
So all the rest do love their vices base
Because virtues beauty comes not into place.
And looser love against Chastity divine
Would shut the door that he might sit alone.
Then wholly should my mind to him incline:
And woxen strait, (since larger love was gone)
That paltry sprite of low contracting lust
Would fit my soul as if it were made for it just.
Then should I with my fellow bird or brute
So strangely metamorphis'd, either ney
Or bellow loud: or if 't may better suit
Chirp out my joy pearch'd upon higher spray.
My passions fond with impudence rehearse,
Immortalize my madness in a verse.
This is the sum of thy deceiving boast
That I vain ludenesse highly should admire,
When I the sense of better things have lost
And changed my heavenly heat for hellish fire,
Passion is blind, but virtues piercing eye
Approaching danger can from far epsy.
And what thou dost Pedantickly object
Concerning my rude rugged uncouth style,
As childish toy I manfully neglect,
And at thy hidden snares do inly smile.
How ill alas! with wisdom it accords
To sell my living sense for liveless words.
My thought's the fittest measure of my tongue,
Wherefore I'll use what's most significant,
And rather then my inward meaning wrong
Or my full-shining notion trimly scant,
I'll conjure up old words out of their grave,
Or call fresh foreign force in if need crave.
And these attending on my moving mind
Shall duly usher in the fitting sense.
As oft as meet occasion I find.
Unusual words oft used give less offence;
Nor will the old contexture dim or mar,
For often used they're next to old, thread bare.
And if the old seem in too rusty hew,
Then frequent rubbing makes them shine like gold,
And glister all with colour gaily new.
Wherefore to use them both we will be bold.
Thus lists me fondly with fond folk to toy,
And answer fools with equal foolery.
The meaner mind works with more nicety,
As spiders wont to weave their idle web,
But braver spirits do all things gallantly
Of lesser failings nought at all affred:
So Natures careless pencil dipped in light
With sprinkled stars hath spattered the Night.
And if my notions clear though rudely thrown
And loosely scattered in my poesy,
May lend men light till the dead Night be gone,
And Morning fresh with roses strew the sky:
It is enough, I meant no trimmer frame
Or by nice needle-work to seek a name.
Vain man! that seek name amongst earthly men
Devoid of God and all good virtuous lere;
Who groping in the dark do nothing ken
But mad; with griping care their souls do tear,
Or burst with hatred or with envy pine
Or burn with rage or melt out at their eyne.
Thrice happy he whose name is writ above,
And doth good though gaining infamy;
Requites evil turns with hearty love,
And recks not what befalls him outwardly.
Whose worth is in himself, and only bliss
In his pure conscience that doth nought amiss.
Who places pleasure in his purged soul
And virtuous life his treasure doth esteem;
Who can his passions master and control,
And that true lordly manliness doth deem,
Who from this world himself hath clearly quit
Counts nought his own but what lives in his sprite.
So when his sprite from this vain world shall flit
It bears all with it whatsoever was dear
Unto it self, passing in easy fit,
As kindly ripened corn comes out of the ear.
Thus mindless of what idle men will say
He takes his own and stilly goes his way.
But the retinue of proud Lucifer,
Those blustering Poets that fly after fame
And deck themselves like the bright Morning-starre.
Alas! it is but all a crackling flame.
For death will strip them of that glorious plume
That airy bliss will vanish into fume.
For can their careful ghosts from Limbo ^ake
Return, or listen from the bowed sky
To hear how well their learned lines do take?
Or if they could; is Heavens felicity
So small as by mans praise to be increased,
Hells pain no greater then hence to be eased?
Therefore once dead in vain shall I transmit
My shadow to gazing Posterity;
Cast far behind me I shall never see it,
On Heavens fair Sun having fast fixed mine eye.
Nor while I live, heed I what man doth praise
Or underprize mine unaffected lays.
What moves thee then, said he, to take the pains
And spenden time if thou contemn'st the fruit?
Sweet fruit of fame, that fills the Poets brains
With high conceit and feeds his fainting wit.
How pleasant 'tis in honour here to live
And dead, thy name for ever to survive!
Or is thy abject mind so basely bent
As of thy Muse to maken Merchandise?
(And well I wot this is no strange intent.)
The hopeful glimpse of gold from chattering Pies,
From Daws and Crows, and Parots oft hath wrung
An unexpected Pegascian song.
Foul shame on him, quoth I, that shameful thought
Doth entertain within his dunghill breast,
Both God and Nature hath my spirits wrought
To better temper and of old hath blessed
My lofty soul with more divine aspires
Then to be touched with such vile low desires.
I hate and highly scorn that Kestrell kind
Of bastard scholars that subordinate
The precious choice induements of the mind
To wealth or worldly good. Adulterate
And cursed brood! Your wit and will are born
Of the earth and circling thither do return.
Profit and honour be those measures scant
Of your slight studies and endeavours vain,
And when you once have got what you did want
You leave your learning to enjoy your gain.
Your brains grow low, your bellies swell up high,
Foul sluggish fat ditts up your dulled eye.
Thus what the earth did breed, to the earth is gone,
Like fading herb or feebly drooping flower,
By feet of men and beast quite trodden down,
The muck-sprung learning cannot long endure.
Back she returns lost in her filthy source,
Drowned, choked or slocken by her cruel nurse.
True virtue to her self's the best reward,
Rich with her own and full of lively spirit,
Nothing cast down for want of due regard,
Or because rude men acknowledge not her merit.
She knows her worth and stock from whence she sprung,
Spreads fair without the warmth of earthly dung,
Dewed with the drops of Heaven shall flourish long;
As long as day and night do share the sky,
And though that day and night should fail yet strong
And steady, fixed on Eternity
Shall bloom for ever. So the soul shall speed
That loves virtue for no worldly meed.
Though sooth to sayn, the worldly meed is due
To her more then to all the world beside.
Men ought do homage with affections true
And offer gifts for God doth there reside.
The wise and virtuous soul is his own seat
To such what's given God himself doth get.
But earthly minds whose sight's sealed up with mud
Discern not this flesh-clouded Deity,
No do acknowledge any other good
Then what their mole-warp hands can feel and try
By groping touch; thus (worth of them unseen)
Of nothing worthy that true worth they when.
Wherefore the prudent Law-givers of old
Even in all Nations, with right sage foresight
Discovering from far how clums and cold
The vulgar wight would be to yield what's right
To virtuous learning, did by law design
Great wealth and honour to that worth divine.
But nought's by law to Poesy due said he,
No doth the solemn Statesmans head take care
Of those that such impertinent pieces be
Of common-weals. Thou'd better then to spare
Thy useless vein. Or tell else, what may move
Thy busy Muse such fruitless pains to prove.
No pains but pleasure to do the dictates dear
Of inward living nature. What doth move
The Nightingale to sing so sweet and clear
The Thrush, or Lark that mounting high above
Chants her shrill notes to heedless ears of corn
Heavily hanging in the dewy morn.
When life can speak, it can not well withhold
To express its own impressions and hid life.
Or joy or grief that smoothered lie untold
Do vex the heart and wring with restless strife.
Then are my labours no true pains but ease
My souls unrest they gently do appease.
Besides, that is not fruitless that no gains
Brings to my self. I others profit deem
Mine own: and if at these my heavenly flames
Others receiven light, right well I when
My time's not lost. Art thou now satisfied
Said I: to which the scoffing boy replied.
Great hope indeed thy rymes should men enlight,
That be with clouds and darkness all o'recast,
Harsh style and harder sense void of delight
The Readers wearied eye in vain do wast.
And when men win thy meaning with much pain,
Thy uncouth sense they coldly entertain.
For wotst thou not that all the world is dead
Unto that Genius that moves in thy vein
Of poetry! But like by like is fed.
Sing of my Trophies in triumphant strein,
Then correspondent life, thy powerful verse
Shall strongly strike and with quick passion pierce.
The tender fry of lads and lasses young
With thirsty ear thee compassing about,
Thy Nectar-dropping Muse, thy sugared song
Will swallow down with eager hearty draught;
Relishing truly what thy rymes convey,
And highly praising thy soul-smiting lay.
The mincing maid her mind will then bewray,
Her heart-bloud flaming up into her face,
Grave matrons will wex wanton and betray
Their unresolv'dnesse in their wonted grace;
Young boys and girls would feel a forward spring,
And former youth to eld thou back would bring.
All Sexes, Ages, Orders, Occupations
Would listen to thee with attentive ear,
And eas'ly moved with thy sweet persuasions,
Thy pipe would follow with full merry cheer.
While thou thy lively voice did loud advance
Their tickled blood for joy would inly dance.
But now, alas! poor solitary man!
In lonesome desert thou dost wander wide
To seek and serve thy disappearing Pan,
Whom no man living in the world hath eyed:
For Pan is dead but I am still alive,
And live in men who honour to me give:
They honour also those that honour me
With sacred songs. But thou now sing to trees
To rocks to Hills, to Caves that senseless be
And mindless quite of thy hid mysteries,
In the void air thy idle voice is spread,
Thy Muse is music to the deaf or dead.
Now out alas! said I, and wele-away
The tale thou tell I confess too true.
Fond man so dotes on this living clay
His carcase dear, and doth its joys pursue,
That of his precious soul he takes no keep
Heavens love and reasons light lie fast asleep.
This bodies life vain shadow of the soul
With full desire they closely do embrace,
In fleshly mud like swine they wallow and roll,
The loftiest mind is proud but of the face
Or outward person; if men but adore
That walking sepulchre, cares for no more.
This is the measure of mans industry
To wexen some body and getten grace
To 's outward presence; though true majesty
Crowned with that heavenly light and lively rays
Of holy wesdome and Seraphic love,
From his deformed soul he far remove.
Slight knowledge and less virtue serves his turn
For this design. If he hath trod the ring
Of peddling arts; in usual pack-horse form
Keeping the rode; O! then 't's a learned thing.
If any chanced to write or speak what he
Conceives not't were a foul discourtesy?
To cleanse the soul from sin, and still diffide
Whether our reasons eye be clear enough
To intromit true light, that fain would glide
Into purged hearts, this way's too harsh and rough:
Therefore the clearest truths may well seem dark
When sloathfull men have eyes so dim and stark.
These be our times. But if my minds presage
Bear any moment, they can ne'er last long,
A three branched Flame will soon sweep clean the stage
Of this old dirty dross and all wex young.
My words into this frozen air I throw
Will then grow vocal at that general thaw.
Nay, now you're perfect mad, said he, with scorn,
And full of foul derision quit the place.
The sky did rattle with his wings ytorn
Like to rent silk. But I in the mean space
Sent after him this message by the wind
Be it so I'm mad, yet sure I am you're blind.
By this the out-stretch'd shadows of the trees
Pointed me home-ward, and with one consent
Foretold the days descent. So straight I rise
Gathering my limbs from off the green pavement
Behind me leaving then the slooping Light.

Cl. And now let's up, Vesper brings on the Night.

FINIS.
A Particular Interpretation appertaining to the three last books of the
Platonic Song of the Soul.
A
ATom-lives. The same that Centrall lives. Both the terms denotate the
indivisibility of the inmost essence it self; the pure essential form I mean,
of plant, beast or man, yea of angels themselves, good or bad.

Apogee, See Interpret. Gen. Autokineticall, Ananke, Acronycall, Alethea-land,

Animadversall. That lively inward animadversall. It is the soul it self, for I
cannot conceive the body doth animadvert; when as objects plainly exposed to
the sight are not discovered till the soul takes notice of them.

B
BOdy. The ancient Philosphers have defined it, (...). Sext. Emperic. Pyrrhon.
Hypotyp. lib. 3. cap. 5. Near to this is that description, Psychathan, Cant. 2.
Stanz. 12. lib. 2, Matter extent in three dimensions. But for that (...),
simple trinall distension doth not imply it, wherefore I declined it. But took
in matter according to their conceit, that fancy a Materia prima, I
acknowledge none, and consequently no such corpus natural as our Physiologist
make the subject of that science. That (...) is nothing but a fixed spirit, the
conspissation or coagulation of the Cuspidall particles of the Cone, which are
indeed the Centrall Tasis, or inward essence of the sensible world. These be an
infinite number of vital Atoms that may be wakened into diverse tinctures, or
energies, into fiery, watery, earthy, c. And one divine Fiat can unloose them
all into an universal mist, or turn them out of that sweat into a dry and
pure Ethereal temper. These be the last projections of life from the soul of
the world; and are act or form though debil and indifferent, like that which
they call the first matter. But they are not merely passive but meet their
information half way, as I may so speak: are radiant ab intimo and awake into
this or the other operation, by the powerful appulse of some superadvenient
form. That which change of Phantasmes is to the soul, that is alteration of
rays to them. For their rays are ab intrinseco, as the phantasmes of the
soul. These be the real matter of which all supposed bodies are compounded,
and this matter (as I said) is form and life, so that all is life and form what
ever is in the world, as I have somewhere intimated in Antipsychopan: But
however I use the term body ordinarily in the usual and vulgar acception. And
for that sense of the ancients, nearest to which I have defined it in the place
first above mentioned, that I seem not to choose that same as most easy to
proceed against in disproving the corporeity of the soul, the arguments do as
necessarily conclude against such a natural body as is ordinarily described in
Physiologie (as you may plainly discern if you list to observe) as also against
this body composed of the Cuspidall particles of the Cone. For though they be
Centrall lives, yet are they neither Plasticall, Sensitive, or Rational, so
far are they from proving to be the humane soul whose nature is there
discust.

C
COne: Is a solid figure made by the turning of a rectangular triangle, about;
one of the sides that include the right angle resting, which will be then the
Axis of the completed Cone. But I take it sometimes for the comprehension of
all things, God himself not left out, whom I term the Basis of the Cone or
Universe. And because all from him descends, (...), with abatement or
contraction, I give the name of Cone to the Universe. And of Cone rather then
Pyramid because of the roundness of the figure, which the effluxes of all
things imitate.

Chaos, See interpret Gen. Chronicall, Clare,

Circulation, The term is taken from a toyish observation, viz. the circling
of water when a stone is cast into a standing pool. The motion drives on
circularly, the first rings are thickest, but the further they go they grow the
thinner, till they vanish into nothing. Such is the diffusion of the species
audible in the stricken air, as also of the visible species. In brief any
thing is said to circulate that diffuses its image or species in a round. It
might have been more significantly called orbiculation; seeing this
circumfusion makes not only a circle, but fills a sphere, which may be called
the sphere of activity. Yet Circulation more fitly sets out the diminution of
activity, from those rings in the water which as they grow in compass, abate
in force and thickness. But sometimes I use Circulate in an ordinary sense to
turn round, or return in a circle.

Centre, Centrall, Centrality. When they are used out of their ordinary sense,
they signify the depth or inmost being of any thing, from whence its acts and
energies flow forth. See Atom-lives.

Cuspis of the Cone. The multiplied Cuspis of the Cone is nothing but the last
projection of life from Psyche, which is (...) a liquid fire or fire and water,
which are the corporeal or material principles of all things, changed or
disgregated (if they be centrally distinguishable) and again mingled by the
virtue of Physis or Spermaticall life of the world; of these are the Sun and
all the Planets, they being kned together, and fixed by the Centrall power of
each Planet and Sun. The volatile Ether is also of the same, and all the
bodies of plants, beasts and men. These are they which we handle and touch, a
sufficient number compact together. For neither is the noise of those little
flies in a summer-evening audible severally: but a full Quire of them strike
the ear with a pretty kind of buzzing. Strong and tumultuous pleasure and
scorching pain reside in these, they being essential and centrall, but sight
and hearing are only of the images of these, See Body.

Eternity. Is the steady comprehension of all things at once. See Aeon
described in my Expos upon Psychozoia.

Energy, It is a peculiar Platonicall term. In my Interpret. Gen. I expounded
it Operation, Efflux, Activity. None of those words bear the full sense of it.
The examples there are fit, viz. the light of the Sun, the phantasms of the
soul. We may collect the genuine sense of the word by comparing several places
in the Philosopher. (...) (...). For every being hath its Energy, which is the
image of it self, so that it existing that Energy doth also exist, and
standing still is projected forward more or less. And some of those energies
are weak and obscure, others hid or undiscernable, othersome greater and of a
larger projection. Plotin. Ennead. 4. lib. 5. cap. 7. And again, Ennead. 3.
lib. 4. (...). And we remain above by the Intellectual man, but by the extreme
part of him we are held below, as it were yielding an efflux from him to that
which is below, or rather an energy he being not at all lessened. This
curiosity Antoninus also observes, (lib. 8. Meditat.) in the nature of the
sun-beams, where although he admits of (...), yet he doth not of (...) which is
(...). The sun, saith he, is diffused, and his fusion is every where but
without effusion, c. I will only add one place more out of Plotinus. Ennead.
3. lib. 6. (...). The natural energy of each power of the soul is life not
parted from the soul though gone out of the soul, viz. into act.

Comparing of all these places together, I cannot better explain this Platonic
term, energy, then by calling it the rays of an essence, or the beams of a
vital Centre. For essence is the Centre as it were of that which is truly
called Energy, and Energy the beams and rays of an essence. And as the Radii
of a circle leave not the centre by touching the Circumference, no more doth
that which is the pure Energy of an essence, leave the essence by being called
out into act, but is (...) a working in the essence though it flow out into
act. So that Energy depends always on esence, as Lumen on Lux, or the
creature on God; Whom therefore Synesius in his Hymns calls the Centre of all
things.

Entelecheia. See Interpret. Gen.

F
FAith. Platonic faith in the first Good. This faith is excellently described
in Proclus. where it is set above all ratiocination, nay, Intellect it self.
(...). But to them that endeavour to be joined with the first Good, there is no
need of knowledge or multifarious cooperation, but of settlednesse,
steadiness, and rest. lib. 1. cap. 24. Theolog. Platon. And in the next
chapter; (...). For we must not seek after that absolute or first Good
cognoscitively or imperfectly, but giving our selves up to the divine light,
and winking (that is shutting our eyes of reason and understanding) so to place
our selves steadily in that hidden Unity of all things. After he prefers
this faith before the clear and present assent to the (...), yea and the (...),
so that he will not that any intellectual operation should come in comparison
with it. (...). For the operation of the Intellect is multiform and by
diversity separate from her objects, and is in a word, intellectual motion
about the object intelligible. But the divine faith must be simple and uniform,
quiet and steadily resting in the haven of Goodness. And at last he summarily
concludes, (...). See Procl. Theolog. Platonic. lib. 1. cap. 25.

H
HYle. See Interpret. Gen.

I
INtellect.. Sometimes it is to be interpreted Soul. Sometime the intellectual
faculty of the soul. Sometimes Intellect is an absolute essence shining into
the soul: whose nature is this. A substance purely immaterial, impeccable,
actually omniform, or comprehending all things at once* which the soul doth
also being perfectly joined with the Intellect. (...) (...). Plot. Ennead. 1.
lib. 1. cap. 8. Ideas, or Idees, Sometimes they are forms in the Intellectual
world. viz. in Aeon, or On, other sometimes, phantasmes or representations in
the soul. Innate Idees are the souls nature it self, her uniform essence, able
by her Fiat to produce this or that phantasm into act.

Idiopathy. See Interpret. Gen. Ia^

L
LOgos. See Interpr. Gen.

Life. The vital operation of any soul. Sometime it is the soul it self, be it
sensitive, vegetative, or rational.

Lower man. The lower man is our enquickned body, into which our soul comes, it
being fitly prepared for the receiving of such a guest. The manner of the
production of souls, or rather their non-production is admirably well set down
in Plotinus, See, Ennead. 6. lib. 4. cap. 14, 15.

M
MOnad. See Interpr. Gen.

Mundane. Mundane spirit, Is that which is the spirit of the world or Universe.
I mean by it not an intellectual spirit, but a fine, unfixed, attenuate,
subtle, ethereal substance, the immediate vehicle of plasticall or sensitive
life.

Memory. Mundane memory. Is that memory that is seated in the Mundane spirit of
man, by a strong impression, or inustion of any phantasm, or outward sensible
object, upon that spirit. But there is a Memory more subtle and abstract in
the soul it self, without the help of this spirit, which she also carries away
with her having left the body.

Magical. That is, attractive, or commanding by force of sympathy with the
life of this natural world.

Moment. Sometimes signifies an instant, as indivisible, as (...), which in
motion answers to an instant in time, or a point in a line, Aristot. Phys. In
this sense I use it, Psychathan. lib. 3. cant. 2. stanz. 16. But in a moment
sol doth ray. But Cant. the 3. Stanz. 45. v. 2. I understand, as also doth
Lansbergius, by a moment one second of a minute. In Antipsych. Cant. 2. Stanz.
the 20. v. 2. by a moment I understand a minute, or indefinitely any small
time.

O
ORb. Orb Intellectual, is nothing else but Aeon or the Intellectual world.
The Orbs general mentioned Psycathan. lib. 1. cant. 3. stanz. 23. v. 2. I
understand by them but so many universal orders of beings, if I may so term
them all; for Hyle hath little or nothing of being.

Omniformity, The omniformity of the soul is the having in her nature all
forms, latent at least, and power of awaking them into act, upon occasion.

Out-world* and Out-Heaven. The sensible world, the visible Heaven.

P
PErigee, See Interpret. Gen. Psychicall, Parelies, Parallax, Protopathy.
Parturient. See, Vaticinant.

Fantasy. Lower fantasy, is that which resides in the Mundane spirit of a
man, See Memory.

Q.
Quantitative. Forms quantitative, are such sensible energies as arise from the
complexion of many natures together, at whose discretion they vanish. That's
the seventh Orb of things, though broken and not filling all as the other do.
But if you take it for the whole sensible world, it is entire, and is the same
that Tasis in Psycozoia. But the centre of Tasis, viz. the multiplication of
the real Cuspis of the Cone (for Hyle that is set for the most contract point
of the Cuspis is scarce to be reckoned among realities) that immense diffusion
of atoms, is to be referred to Psyche, as an internal vegetative act, and so
belongs to Physis the lowest order of life. For as that warmth that the sense
doth afford the body, is not rational, sensitive, or imaginative, but
vegetative; So this, (...) i. e. liquid fire, which Psyche sends out, and is
the outmost, last, and lowest operation from her self, is also vegetative.

R
Rhomboids. See Interpr. general.

Reason. I understand by Reason, the deduction of one thing from another, which
I conceive proceeds from a kind of continuitie of phantasmes: and is something
like the moving of a cord at one end; the parts next it rise with it. And by
this concatenation of phantasmes I conceive, that both brutes and men are moved
in reasonable ways and methods in their ordinary external actions.

Rays. The rays of an essence is its energy. See Energy.

Reduplicative. That is reduplicative, which is not only in this point, but
also in another, having a kind of circumscribed ubiquity, viz. in its own
sphere. And this is either by being in that sphere omnipresent it self, as the
soul is said to be in the body tota in toto tota in qualibet part, or else at
least by propagation of rays, which is the image of it self; and so are divers
sensible objects Reduplicative, as light, colours, sounds. And I make account
either of these ways justly denominate any thing spiritual. Though the former
is most properly, at least more eminently spiritual. And whether any thing be
after that way spiritual saving the Divinity, there is reason to doubt. For
what is entirely omnipresent in a sphere, whose diametre is but three feet, I
see not, why (that in the circumference being as fresh and entire as that in
the centre) it should stop there and not proceed even in infinitum, if the
circumference be still as fresh and entire as the centre. But I define nothing.

S
SPermaticall. It belongs properly to Plants, but is transferred also to the
Plasticall power in Animals, I enlarge it to all magnetic power whatsoever
that doth immediately rule and actuate any body. For all magnetic power is
founded in Physis, and in reference to her, this world is but one great Plant,
(one (...) giving it shape and corporeal life) as in reference to Psyche, one
happy and holy Animal.

Spirit. Sometimes it signifies the soul, othersometime, the natural spirits
in a mans body, which are Vinculum animae corporis, and the souls vehicle:
Sometimes life. See Reduplicative.

Soul. When I speak of mans Soul, I understand that which Moses saith was
inspired into the body, (fitted out and made of earth) by God, Genes. 2. which
is not that impeccable spirit that cannot sin; but the very same that the
Platonists call (...), a middle essence betwixt that which they call (...) (and
we would in the Christian language call (...)) and the life of the body which
is (...), a kind of an umbratil vitalitie, that the soul imparts to the body
in the enlivening of it: That and the body together, we Christians would call
(...) and the suggestions of it, especially in its corrupt estate, (...). And
that that which God inspired into Adam was no more then (...), the soul, not
the spirit, though it be called (...) Spiraculum vitae; is plain out of the
text; because it made man but become a living soul, (...). But you will say, he
was a dead soul before, and this was the spirit of life, yea the spirit of God,
the life of the soul that was breathed into him.

But if (...) implie such a life and spirit, you must acknowledge the same to
be also in the most stupid of all living creatures, even the fishes (whose soul
is but as salt to keep them from stinking, as Philo speaks) for they are said
to be (...) chap. 1. v. 20. 21. See 1 Cor. chap. 15. v. 45, 46. In brief
therefore, that which in Platonisme is (...), is in Scripture (...); what (...)
in one, (...), the brute or beast in the other, (...) the same in both.

Self-reduplicative. See Reduplicative.

T
TRicentreitie. Centre is put for essence, so Tricentreitie must implie a
trinity of essence. See Centre, and Energy.

V
VAticinant. The soul is said to be in a vaticinant or parturient condition,
when she hath some kind of sense and hovering knowledge of a thing, but yet
cannot distinctly and fully, and commandingly represent it to her self, cannot
plainly apprehend, much less comprehend the matter. The phrase is borrowed of
Proclus, who describing the incomprehensiblenesse of God, and the desire of all
things towards him, speaks thus; (...). Theolog Platon lib. 1. cap. 21. See
Psychathan. lib. 3. cant. 3. stanz. 12. 14.

The Philosophers Devotion.
SIng aloud his praise rehearse
Who hath made the Universe.
He the boundless Heavens has spread
All the vital Orbs has kned;
He that on Olympus high
Tends his flocks with watchful eye,
And this eye has multiplied
Midst each flock for to reside.
Thus as round about they stray
Touches each with out-stretch'd ray,
Nimbly they hold on their way,
Shaping out their Night and Day.
Never slack they; none respires,
Dancing round their Centrall fires.
In due order as they move
Echo's sweet be gently drove
Thorough Heavens vast Hollowness,
Which unto all corners press:
Music that the heart of Jove
Moves to joy and sportful love;
Fills the listening sailors ears
Riding on the wandering Spears.
Neither Speech nor Language is
Where their voice is not transmisse.
God is Good, is Wise, is Strong,
Witness all the creature-throng,
Is confessed by every Tongue.
All things back from whence they sprung,
As the thankful Rivers pay
What they borrowed of the Sea.
Now my self I do resign,
Take me whole I all am thine.
Save me, God! from Self-desire,
Deaths pit, dark Hells raging fire,
Envy, Hatred, Vengeance, Ire.
Let not Lust my soul bemire.
Quit from these thy praise I'll sing,
Loudly sweep the trembling string.
Bear a part, O Wisdoms sons!
Freed from vain Relligions.
Lo! from far I you salute,
Sweetly warbling on my Lute.
Indie, Egypt, Arabie,
Asia, Greece, and Tartarie,
Carmel-tracts, and Lebanon
With the Mountains of the Moon,
From whence muddy Nile doth run,
Or wherever else you won;
Breathing in one vital air,
One we are though distant far.
Rise at once lett's sacrifice
Odours sweet perfume the skies.
See how Heavenly lightning fires
Hearts inflamed with high aspires!
All the substance of our souls
Up in clouds of Incense rolls.
Leave we nothing to our selves
Save a voice, what need we else!
Or an hand to wear and tire
On the thankful Lute or Lyre.
Sing aloud his praise rehearse
Who hath made the Universe.
FINIS.

