Practica Plutarche the excellent Philosopher,



Practica of the Philosopher Plutarche, upon the Health of the body of man.


A preservation of health for all the parts of the body. and howe to ordre
them.
IN this my great friend Plutarche gives me council to have always the hands
warm, and that by no means he suffer them to be cold. Also that an Ague or
fever, causes the utter parts of the body, customably to be cold, when he
constrains heate all to fl inwardely. Again if those things which be
outward, and stretch to the highest parts do bring and disperse matter
through all the body, that then it is wholesome. Moreover if we labour with out
hands, that then by the motion of that part, heate is wyllyngly moved to be
in all the parts of our body, but if we do no such thing, then we must
provide that no cold take the upper parts. And this was one of the matters
which he was displeased with. The other except I be deceived was of meates to
be mynistred to a pacyent, he doth comaude that the pacyent shall taste and take
his meat lunge or he be taken because we being in health may accustom
ourselves therewith lest that when the syckenes is come we shulde abhor caste
our mind against it, as chyldri do, but let it be customably given by little,
lest that when the fit takes us we be grieved with meates, as we be with
medycynes and lest that we may scarsely bear it, when we must needs take some
meates that besod and unsavoury, wherefore sometime it is not to be refused to
take meat{is} with vnwasshed hands, neither to drink water, neither to drink
warm drink in somer. But let these sophysticall crakes pass, as to abstain
from such things, which appear to be done under a pretense of temperance
And let us so use our stomaske by little and little, that without grefe it may
give place to that which is profytable, let us put out of our mind ye
superstycious and scrupelous care of such things in our diseases lest that we
repent with the that fall from great and merry pleasures, in to a base fylthy
state of living, whereof this was excellently spoken, Chose the best state of
life.

Here follows Electuaryes to avoid colour.
HOwe will I write of them that avoid colours, and first of the electuary
called Diaprunis, it is called so because it stands most by Prunes, it
voydeth colour fro the stomach. and fro the liver. Electuary of the juice of
Roses, that is properly against the hot gowte and purges the reed colour. And
it is good for syckenes in the joints of colour. Also for them that be right
sick in the Fever tercian.

Howe thou shall know to give the quantyte of Medicine.
MEdycynes before yt they be compounded together they be divers in the making
as some of more, and some of less, as of Scamony and of other veymy moystynges
and violent, as Turbyt Elebre, Agryt Ensorbie, Colo Bloe and of all other like
these, so that the taking of Irapigra shall be.iij. drames, the weight of a
drame is two pens halfepenye.

Ieraphini but two drames, for that is more compounded with venymus medycynes,
violence than Irapigra, therefore the less shall be taken thereof.

Also of Benedicta: may be.iii. drammes.

Also blanca.iii. drammes.

Also of Pilularu, Archiarum shulde be taken.iii. drammes.

Also of Pilule Aure.iii. drames

Also of Pulularu de Euforbie.iii. drammes.

Also of Pulularu Fetidum of Stomaticum laxatiuum.ii. drammes,

Also of Electuarium dulce.ii drammes.

Also of Theodoricon ana cardiu.iii. drames.

Now I have showed you of the gyuynge of quantyte of medycynes, the dyuersyte
of the howe they avoid superfluyte of fleume or colour.

Here begins the quantytes to avoid Melancholy.
AS it is said of Ieraphy, ny so we shall say of Diacene, and the gyuyuge of
the quantite shall be an ounce. Hoc auicena. Also of Trifera sarasenica the
receyte of it is.iiij. drames.

Also of Theodoricon eupisticon.ii. drammes.

Also the receyte of Ieralododion.ii. drammes.

Also of Caterica imperiale one dram.

Now it shall be said of the quantytes of Medycynes.
TO avoid Colour as of Diaprunis.ii. drammes.

Also the receyte of succa Rosarum be.iii. drammes. These be the most gyuynge
of medycynes compounded.

Now the medycynes that will avoid cold humours.
MEdicines that avoid cold humours of the breest, and of his mebrs, and
veins the first is pallynu that must be sharped with.iii. drammes of Agryl,
repressed with a dram of the juice of Lycoryse.

Medycynes that shulde purge cold humours of the stomach, and of the liver,
shulde be sharpened with two drammes of Turbit, and repressed with a dram of
the powder of pepper, or Mirabolanus Iudiis ^ebuly, as their quantytes be said
before, or with Esule open as is said before.

Howe hot humours shulde be purged and sharped.
Now hot humours shulde be purged and sharped with Mirabolanus Citemys, or
with Rubarba, or with Cassia fistula asania, or with Tamaridis, or Scamion, and
there be any dropsy of old time fastened on the liver, the medycy may not be
sharped with scamony, for that would take of the skyn of ye liver, therefore
take Esula, or Rubarba, do to the medicines, as is before written.

Here follows his Powders for dysseases.
A Powdre for delicate men for to comfort digestion and to amend the sight,
take Canell; cardamoi, piperis, saturei, maiorane, crucautes, calamynte, of
each half an ounce, nutmuges pompatadyse foli^ of each an ounce, that is to
say, of each.vi. penny weight, salgeme half an uncle ferthynges well tempered
together make powdre of these and use them.

A powdre against the quartain.
A Powdre against the quartain and vice of the spleen, take Coriandre, carin,
seria combusti of each of them a penny weight Aneilanes yclensed.

Against flux of blode.
A Powdre against the flux of blode of the nosethrylles, take encense, mastyke,
sauge dragons ny of each three penny weight, bren the in a shell over the fire
move them till they wax black, make thereof sotyl powdre and cast therein.

A powdre against the Cardyacle, and against to much feblenes, take camphore,
musk, of each three halfpeny weyte, shauynges of yuery, of gold, and silver of
each three penny weyte.

Finis.
Imprinted by me Robert Wire.


