

The Treasury of commodious Conceits, hidden Secrets. and may be called, The
Housewives Closet, of healthful provision.

Mete and necessary for the profitable use of all estates both men and women:
And also pleasant for recreation.

With a necessary Table of all things herein contained.

Gathered out of sundry Experiments lately practised by men of great
knowledge.

By I. Par.

Imprinted at London by Richarde Iones. 1573.

Iohn Partridge to his Book.
Go forth my little Book,
That all on thee may look:
Fear not the cutting book
of Zoylles spiteful rage:
Thou can not Zoyll shone,
Whose tongue on wheels doth ron,
More conning works erst don,
In any former Age
Thou know went never free,
But that the Cur Dog he
Takes his delight and glee
for to deface the same:
How thinkste thou then to void?
The tongur that hath annoyed?
Great works which have employed
continually to frame
A happy common weal?
And which at large reveal,
That time did long conceal,
To pleasure every one:
If thou which art but small
To whom it happen shall,
Small fruit to bring withal,
for men to scan upon:
Yet must thou be content,
To bear what Zoylles bent
Sith forth I have thee sent
(to lay upon thy back)
And if be bap to chide,
Do thou the brunt alyde,
And I will stand aside,
And help thee if you lack.
Finis
To the worshipFVLL, MASTER RICHARDE Mistow, Gentleman: one of the Assistants
of the Company of the Barbours Surgeons: Iohn Partridge wishes increase of
Knowledge by his worthy travail. (??)
AFTER THAT I HAD (worshipful Sir) taken some payne, in collectynge certain
hidden Secretes together, reduced them into one libel, or Pamphlet (for my own
behoof, my familiar freds:) yet at the instance of a certain Gentlewoman
(being my dere and special friend) I was constrained to publish the same, and
considered which my self the saying of ye wise: which is. That good is best,
which to all indifferently, is of like goodness, or effect: or which without
respect of person, is good to all indifferently. The consideration of which,
and her importunacy together instiged me to communicate unto the view public
benefit of all men, this little Book: The coments whereof, doth instruct and
teach all manner of persons Degrees to know perfectly, the manner to make diverse
sundry sorts of fine Conceits as well of meates, as of Coserues Marmalades, as
also, of sweet and pleasant Waters, of wonderful Odours, Operation and
Virtues: With diverse other things that have not hitherto ben publicly known:
which fact of mine (I know) will be, not only dessyked of some, but
altogether codempned: Not for that it is evil, but that their fine heads can
not digest, that any other beside them selves should enjoy the benefit thereof,
having for their MAXIM, that such things, are of small price, as are common
to al men: much after our English Proverbs, Quainty and dainty: Far fette
and dear bought, is good for great Estates. But I account that Person
foolish, and unworthy help of any Physician or Surgeon: that will refuse to
receive, or gain health by the Medicine of any such Physician or Surgeon: Who
by learning the same out of A VICENE, GALENE, or HIPOCRATES, or any others
such like, hath often times cured the Deseuses in sundry and many Persons,
for that the same hath ben commonly used: but rather most wyllynglye and
courteously to embrace the same (for present remedy) as a thing excellently
well experymented and proved: I need not (right Worshipful) to use these
words, for the Defence of this little Book, cosideryng ye your Worship doth
very well accept such things, as vnyuersally bring with them a public profit and
vtylitie: (whence consists your delight,) rewarding liberally, the travail
of such, who have, do travail therein. Wherefore, for that I among al other
persons, do think my self most beholden unto your worship: To gratify your
goodness, and to satisfy the request of my friend, I have compiled this little
Book. which I have put forth under your W. name and protection: protesting, yt
if I shall see this work, which with some cost and charge, I have brought to
perfection, be well accepted at your hands I shall shortly exhibit unto your
Worship, a thing of greater value and estymation. And thus, comyttyng your good
worship to God. I end: who send you your desire of understanding and
knowledge.

Your Worshyps to command. I. P.

Thomas Curteyse Gentleman, in praise of the Auctor.
TO pleasure Contreys state who tends
With careful heed, more perpends
The wealth of others: then his own,
whose seed is sown.
* To pleasure all, and he that sows,
Of all his toil, least profit mowes:
Deserves at least, the dross to have,
that frankly gave
* The Gold that all enriches so,
Therefore thou Book where ere thou go:
Say freely that thy Masters payne,
deserves gain.
* And if that Momus gin to chat,
If thou be wise, yet fear not that,
For good deserving, well doth crave,
reward to have.
* The which reward, without great charge
Thou may give, if that at large
Without reproach, thou let this go,
and thankful show.
Thy self, for that which herein he,
Hath now set forth to pleasure thee:
Who ear thou be, to this incline,
The profits thine.
* FINIS.
T. C.

Thomas Blank Gentleman, in the behalf of the Auctor.
THe Painters Pen: with no small charg^
Doth now and then: depaint at lar^
BELLONAES broils, bloody fig^
To move somwhiles, a mans delight
The Poet eke: with painful Quyll,
Doth sometimes seek: men's ear to fill,
With sundry sorts, of Verses new:
When he reports, things false tri^
In both whereof: the learned find,
No toy nor scoff: or thing by kind,
That brings not out, some learned sky
For which no dout, most wisemen wy
Accept the thing: what ere it be,
That so should bring: Commedytie,
The Partridge here, ye thig hath sough^
which nothing dear: need now be boght
Wherein pleasure: doth full consist,
And eke Treasure: if that thou list,
By travail to, obtain the same,
The which to do, I wyssh thee frame.
And give him praise: that with his toil,
Hath in these days: from foreign soil,
Brought home to thee, pleasure gain:
Then thankful be, his is the payne.
FINIS.
The Chapters and contents of of this Book.
TO bake a Capon with yolks of Eggs. Chapter. i. To bake a Feasant, or Capon,
in steed of a Feasant. Cap. ii. To bake Chickins, Sparrows, or other Birds.
Cap. iii. * To bake Woocoks. Cap. iiii. To make Pescoos of Marow. Cap. v. * To
make a sauce for a roasted Rabbit, first used to King Henry the eight. Cap. vi.
To bake an Oxetung. Cap. vii. * To make vinegar of Roses Violettes, or Elderne
Beries. Cap. viii. To make a Marchpane. chapter. ix. * To gylde a Marchpane, or
Tart. cap. x. To bake Quinces. chapter. xi. * To keep Quinces vnpared all the
year lunge. chapter. xii. To make fine blanch powder for roasted Quinces.
Apples, or Wardens cap. xiii. * To conserve Quinces condict, ready to be eaten.
chapter. xiiii. To keep Plummes condicte in Syrop. chapter. xv. * To keep
cherries, or Gooseberies condicte. chapter. xvi. To make conserve of Roses,
Red, or white: With the sundry Virtues and Operationns of each of them. Cap.
xvij. * To make Conserve of Violet flowers, with the sundry Virtues and
Operations thereof. Cap. xviij. To make Conserve of Buglose flowers, with the
sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. Cap. xix. To make conserve of Borage
flowers, with the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. cap. xx. To make
Conserve of Rosemarie flowers, with the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof.
Cap. xxi. * To make Conserve of Succarie flowers, with the sundry Virtues and
Operations thereof. Cap. xxij. To make Conserve of Elder flowers, with the
sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. Cap. xxiij. To make Conserve of Sorrel,
with the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. chapiter. xxiiij. * To make
conserve of Maydenhaire: with the sundry virtues Operations thereof. chapiter.
xxv. * To make conserve of Elecampane roots with the sundry Virtues and
Operations thereof. cap. xxvi. To make Conserve, of Gladon, or yelow
Flowerdelice: With the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. Ca. xxvij. To
make Marmylade of Quinces. Chapiter. xxviij. To make Marmalade of Damasines or
Prunes. Cap. xxix. To make conserve of Strawberyes, and the virtue thereof. And
of Damasines: or of Prunes. Cap. xxx. To make Conserve of Cherries, and of
Barberies. Cap. xxxi. To make Succade of ye peels of Orenges: and Lemons. Cap.
xxxii. To make green Ginger, Pepper condicte. Cap. xxxiii. * To make al kind
of Syrops. Ca. xxxiiii. To make Manus Christi. Cap. xxxv. To make Losings. Cap.
xxxvi. * To make powder of Holland against the Colicke. Ca. xxxvij. To make a
powder to loose the Belly gently. Ca. xxxviii. * To make a receipt to restore
strength decayed with sickness. Cap. xxxix. To make Ipocras. Chapter. xl. To
make a Violet. or Damask powder for woollen and Furs. Cap. xli. * To make a
sweet powder for lynen cloths, Chapter. xlij. To make a fine Pom Amber. cap.
xliij. To make a fine Fumygation to cast on the coals. cap. xliiij. To make
the same in Oslets. cap. xlv. * To make a moist Fume, to put in a Fuming Dish.
cap. xlvi. To make a Fumygation for a Press of Clothes. cap. xlvij. To make a
powder for sweet waters. chapter. xlviii. To make Damask water another way.
chapter. xlix. To perfume Gloves diverse ways. chapter. l. To make a Perfume
for Chystes and Cubboords. And also for Gloves. cap. li. To colour Gloves. cap.
lii. To make Musk Soap. cap. liij. To make red sealyng Wax. cap. liiij. To
make sweet Damask Powder. iiii. manner of ways. cap. lv. * To keep Barberies
whole in Syrope. chapter. lvi. To make fine Rice Porredg. cap. lvii. * For the
Ague in a woman's Breast. chapter. lviii. For the unnatural heate of the Liver.
chapter. lix. * For the canker in the mouth. cap. lx. * To know what time in
the year Herbs and Flowers, should be gathered in their full strength. cap.
lxi. The sundry virtues of Roses for diverse Medicynes. cap. lxii. * The sundry
virtues of Lyllyes. cap. lxiij. The sundri virtues of Milfoyle. ca. lxiiii The
sundry virtues of Rosemary. ca. lxv. A brief Treatise of Vrines as well of
men vrines, as of Women's, to judge by the colours, which betoken health, which
betoken sickness, which also betoken death. chapter. lxvi. How to make a
sovereign Water, that Doctor Steuens Phisicion, a man of great conning did use
of long experience. And therewith did many cures, and kept it always secret,
till of late a little before his death, that a special friend of his, did get
it in writing of him: with the sundry virtues and operations thereof. chapter.
lxvii.
* FINIS.
The Auctor to his Book concerning his friend, whose importunate suit
procured him to publish the same.
Go little Book of profit pleasance,
unto thy good mistress, without delay
And tel her I send thee for yt {per}formace
of ber ernest suit (since she wold have no nay)
Let her use thy commodities, as well I kno she may
To {pro}fit her freds for health {is} pseruatio
And also to pleasure them, for recreation.
Tel her that all things in thee contained,
I have seen them put oft times in ur:
And given thee to be her servant retained,
To serve her faithfully, doing thy cure.
And also say, of this let her be sure
That she with her suit, of me hath obtained
Thee: that no Gold nor good could have gained.
I. P.

The Closet, or Creasurie of comodious Conceits and hidden Secrets.
To bake a Capon with yolks of Eggs. Cap. i.
WHEN THE CAPON IS made redi, truss him in to ye Coffyn: then take.viii. yolks
of eggs sodden hard, prick into every of them.v. Cloves, put the yolks into
the Coffyn with the Capon: then take a quantity of gynger and salt, and cast
it on the Capon, and let it bake.iii. hours. Then take.ii. raw yolks of eggs
beaten into a Gobblet of Vertuce, with a good quantity of sugre sodden
together, put it into ye Coffyn and so serve it.

To bake a Fesant, or Capon in steed of a Fesant. Ca. ii.
Dress your Capon like a Pheasant trussed, parboiled a little larded with sweet
lard: put him into the Coffin, cast thereon a little Pepper and Salt: put thereto
half a dish of sweet Butter, let it bake for the space of.iii. hours, when
it is cold: serve it forth for a Pheasant. And thus bake a Pheasant.

* To bake Chickins. Chapter. iij.
TAke and truss your Chickins, the feet cut off, put them in the Coffin: the
for every chicken put in every Pie a handful of Goose beries, a quatity of
butter about every Chicken: then take a good quantity of Sugar and Sinimon
with sufficet talt, put them into the Pie, let it bake one howre and a half,
when it is baken take the yolke of an egg half a Goblet of veriuce with
sufficent sugar sodden together, put in the pie serve it.

To bake Woodcoks. Chapter. iiij.
PErboyle them, and being trussed put them into the Coffyn with sweet lard
about the, season them with Pepper and salt, and a good quantytie of butter,
let them bake one howre a half, so serve them.

To make Pescods of Marow. Chapter. v.
First slice your Marow in length. drive your past as thin as a paper leaf: the
take and lay small Raisins, Cinimon and a little ginger and Sugar about the
Mary, fashion them up like Pescodes, fry them in butter, cast upon them
Cinimon and iuger, and serve them.

A Sauce for a roasted Rabbit: to King Henry the eight. Cap. vj.
TAke an hadful of washed percelye, mince it small, boyle it with Butter
veriuce upon a chafing dish, season it with sugre and a little Pepper gross
beaten, when it is redi: put in a few fine Crumes of white bread, put it in
amongst the other, let it boyle again till it be standing, the lay it in a
Platter, like the breadth of three fingers, lay of each side one roasted Cony
(or more) and so serve them.

To bake an Ox tongue. Chapter. vij.
Sees the tongue till it be tender, then slyce it on a board in fair pieces:
and take a good quantity of Marow slceed small, cast it into the bottom of the
pie: lay the slices of the tongue upon it: and betwixt every one some marow,
and a little salt upon them. Bake it the space of an howre, then roast half a
manchet a little at the fire, and put the tostes into half a pynte of
Reddewine with a little Vinegar, strain them out together: the take cloves,
Mace, Sinimon and Sugar, sees them in yt liquor till it wax somewhat thick:
make a hole in ye cover of the Pie, put it in, set the Pie again into the Oven
for a quarter of an howre, and serve it.

To make Vinegar of Roses. Chapter. viij.
IN Summer time when Roses blow, gather them ere they be full spread or blown
out, and in dry whether: pluck the leaves, let them lye half a day upon a
fair board. then have a vessel with Vinegar of one or two gallons (if you will
make so much roset,) put therein a great quantity of the said leaves, stop the
vessel close after that you have stirred them well together, let it stand a day
and a night, then divide your Vinegar Rose leaves together in two parts put the
in two great Glasses put in Rose leaves enough, stop the Glasses close, set
them upon a Shelf under a wall side, on the Southside without your house where
the Son may come to them the most part of the day, let them stand there
all the whote Somer lunge: and then strain the vinegar from the Roses, and
keep the vinegre. If you shall once in.x: days, take and strain out the Rose
leaves, and put in new leaves of half a days gathering, the vyneger will
have the more flauor and odour of the Rose.

You may use in steed of Vinegre, wine: that it may wax eygre, and receive ye
virtue of the Roses, both at once. Moreover, you may make your vinegar of wine
white, red, or claret, but the red doth most bind the belly, white doth most
lose.

Also the Damask Rose: is not so great a binder as the red Rose, and the white
Rose loses most of all: hereof you may make vinegre roset.

Thus also, you may make Vinegre of Violets, or of Elder flowers: but you must
firstgather use your flowers of Eldern, as shall be showed hereafter, when we
speak of making Conserve of Elderne flowers.

To make a Mar^hpane. Cap. ix.
TAke half a.ii. of blanched Almons, of white sugre: a quarter of a. It: of
Rose water, half an ounce: of Damask water, as much. Beat the Almons with a
little of the same water, and grind them till they be small: set them on a few
coals of tier, till they wax chick: then beat them again with the Sugre, fine:
Then mixed the sweet waters and then together: and so gather the, fashion your
Marchpane. Then take wafercakes of the broadest making, cut them square, paste
them together with a little liquor, and when you have made the as broad as will
serve your purpose, have ready made a hoop of a green hasell wand of the
thiknes of half an inch on the inner side smothe, and on ye vttersyde round
smooth without any knags: lay this hoop upon your Wafer cakes foresaid, the
fill your hoop with the gear above named, the thiknes of ye hoop: the same driven
smooth above with the back of a Silver Spoon as ye do a Tart and cut away all
the parts of the Cakes even close by the outlyde of the hoop with a sharp
knife, that it may be round, then having white paper vnderneathe it, set it
upon a warm hearthe, or upon an instrument of Iron or bras made for the same
purpose, or into an Oven after the bread is taken out, so it be not stopped,
it may not bake but only be hard and through dried, and ye may while it is
moist stick it full of Comfets of sundry coolers, in a comely order ye must
moist it over with Rose water and Sugar together, make it smooth: and so set
it in the Oven or other instrument, ye clearer it is like lantern horne, so
much the more commended: if it be through dried, and kept in a dri warm air:
a march pane will last many years, it is a comfortable meat, meet for weak
folks, such as have loft the taste of meats by reason of much and long
sickness. The greatest secret that is in the making of this clear, is with a
little fine flower of Rise, Rose water and Sugar beaten together laid thin over
the marchpane ere it go to dryinge: this will make it shine like Ice, as Ladies
report.

To gylde a Marchpane or any other kind of Tart. Cap. x.
TAke and cut your leaf of Gold as it lies upon the book, into square pieces
like dise: with a Conies taylles end moist a little, take the Gold up by the one
corner, lay it on the place being first made moist, with another rail of a
Cony dry, press the Gold down close: And if ye will have the form of an
Heart or the name of IESVS, or any other thing, what soever, cut ye same through
a piece of Paper, lay the Paper upon your Marchpayne, or Carte: then make the
void place of the Paper (throw which, ye Marchpayne appears) moist with
Rosewater, lay on your Gold, press it down, take of your Paper, there
remains behind in Gold the Print cut in the said Paper.

To bake Quinces. Cap. xi.
PAre them, take out ye Core, perpoyle thin in water till they be tender, let
the water run fro the till they be dry: then put into every Coffin one Quince,
i it a good quatity of marow. Also take sugre. Cinnamon, a little Ginger, fill the
Coffin therewith, close it, let it bake an howre, and so serve it.

* To keep Quinces vnpared all the year long. Cap xii.
TAke ripe Quinces and at yt great end cut out a stoppell, then take out the
core clean, and stop the hole again with the same stoppel (but pare them not)
and perboyle them a little, take them up and let the water drayne from them,
then put all the Cores and some of the smallest Quinces into little pieces all
to cut, into the water wherein the Quinces were parboiled, and let them sethe
till the liquor be as thick as molten size, that painters occupy, then take it
from the fire and let it keel: in the mean season couch your cold Quinces in a
barel or an earth pot ye great end downward (if the stoppel be out it makes
small matter) one upon an other. Then put the liquor in, that it be a handful
over and above them, cover them close, and after.iiii. or.v. days, look to
them and when you see the liquor sunk down, put in more of ye same which ye
purposed li kept to cover them as before, then lay a board upon them and a
stone that they rise not, and cover the vessel close with a thick cloth
folded, that it take no air, so let them remain. And when ye intende t^
occupy some of them, uncover the vessel and ye shall find a Cream covering
the whole liquor, break it in ye midst, turn it over with your hand, then take
out your fruit in order beginning in ye midst first: then by ye sides, so that
you remove none (it is may be) but those yt you take away and every time that
ye break the Creme to fetch Quinces, turn the Cream over again into his
place, for you must know that the Cream keeps out air, kepeeth in the
strength of the Surrop, therefore it makes much to the conservation of the
fruit to save it, and also to se ye vessel close covered. Also when ye will
bake your Quinces, wash them well and clean in warm water, and bake them as
before is written.

To make fine Blanch powder for roasted Quinces. Chapter. xiij.
TAke fine Sugar half a pound beaten in a whote Mortar too fine powder, of
white Ginger pared half an ounce, of chosen Sinimon a quarter of an ounce
beaten ready to fine powder, mixed them well together, and if you will have it
most excellent cast two Spoonful of Rose or Damask water in the beating of the
Sugar.

To conserve Quinces in Syrope condict, always ready to be served whole: or in
quarters. Cap. xiiij.
AFter your Quinces are cored and pared, sees them till they be tender soft:
then lay them out till they be cold, in the mean time take of ye same licor.
ii. quarts or more (accordig to the number of your Quinces which ye will keep)
and put therein the cores and some other small Quinces, all to cut in small
pieces, sethe them in ye liquor to make the Syrope strong, strain them, put
into the liquor being.ii. or.iii. quarts.i. pynte of Rosewater, for every
quart also of liquor, one half pound of sugar, sees them again together on a
soft fire of coals till ye sugar be incorporated with the liquor, then put in
your Quinces, let them sees softly till you perceive that your Syrope is as
thick as live honey, the set them to keel, and take them out, lai them in a tray
or treene platter: till they be cold, then take one ounce of bruised Cinimon,
some whole cloves, put them, with some of the Cinimon in the Syrope, and when it
is cold lai a lard of quinces in your glass (called a gestelyn glass) or an
earth pot well glased, then straw a little of your Cinimon upon you Quinces,
the power some Syrope, lay on an other lard of Quinces, and again of your
spice, and Syroppe, and so forth till you have done: and cover them two
fingers over with Syrop above, cover the close: and within.iii. or.iiii. days,
look to them, and when ye find the Syrop shrunken down, put in more, and so
reserve them. Chese are to be served in with Syrop.

See that the Quinces be tenderly sodden, and the Syrop thick and strong
enough.

Plummes condict in Syrrope Chapter. xv.
TAke half a pound of Sugar, half a pint of Rose water and a pint of fair
Rain water, or of some other distilled water, sees ye Sugar ye two waters upon
a soft fire of coals, till ye one half be consumed: the take it fro ye fire
when it leaves boylig, put therein half a pound of ripe Damazines, or other
plummes, set it again on the embers, keep it in the like heate till the
plummes be soft by the space of an howre if need be, then put into it some
cloves bruised and when it is could keep it in a Glass, or in an earthen or
Gallypotte, the stronger the Syrrope is with Sugar, the better it will
continue.

Some put into the Syrroup Sinimon, Saunders, Nutmegs. Cloves, and a little
Ginger: seethe them not hastily for fear of much breaking.

To keep Cherries condict, or Goose beries. Cap. xvi.
MAke your syrop as for plumes then take half a pound of Cherries and cut off
half the length of ye stalk of every Cheri, put them into the syrop, and use
them as you did the plummes, put in what spice that pleases you, and so keep
it as before is written: but make your syrop strong enough of sugar lest it
wax whore and corrupt, then must ye make a new syrop stronger of the Sugar:
and put the cherries in it to keep, as before is said. Thus ye may do with
Goosberies to make of them Tarts, or sauces al ye winter lunge, saving that
Goosberies may be well sodden without breaking, because of their tough skin, so
it be softly and dilligently donne.

To make Conserve of Roses, or other Flowers. Cap. xvij.
TAke the Buds of Red Roses, somewhat before they be ready to spread: cut the
red part of the leaves from ye white, then take the red leues and beat and
grind them in a stone mortar with a pestell of wood, and to every ounce of
Roses, put.iii. ounces of sugar in ye grinding (after the leues are well beaten)
and grind them together till they be perfectly incorporated, then put it in a
glass made for the nonce: and of purpose: or else into an earth pot: stop it
close, and so keep it.

Thus ye may make conserves of all kind of flowers used thereunto.

The virtue of the conserve of Roses.
Conserve of Roses comfort the stomach, the heart and all the bowels, it
molysyeth and softneth the bowels, and is good against black Coler:
melancoiy, conserves of white roses doth loose the bellymore then the red.

To make conserve of Violets. Chapter. xviii.
TAke the flowers of Violets anpicke them from the stalk, beat and grind them
with sugar, as you did your Roses, to these put double the weight of Sugar to
ye weight of Violet flowers, but to all other flowers put.iii. parts of Sugar
to i. part of the flowers.

The virtue of the same.
Conserve of Violet Flowers is good against the heate and influmation of Coler,
called yellow Coler, it quenches thirstines, it makes ye Belly moist soluble.

The virtue of the conserve of Buglosse. chapter. xix.
Conserve of buglosse flowers, coforteth ye hot heart, it is good for the
frantic, for the lunatic, and for the melancolicke, it is good for the
Sincop and swooning, it takes away heart burning, and trembling of the heart,
or stomach, it profits against Coler.

The virtue of the conserve of Borage. Chapter. xx.
Conserve of Borage flowers, is of like virtue, it is especially good against
black Coler, or melacoli, it also makes one merry.

The virtue of the conserve of Rosmary. Chapter. xxj.
Conserve of the flowers of Rose mary, comfort the cold and moist brain,
it comforts also the Senowes, it is good against melancholy and flewme.

The virtue of the conserve of Succary. Cap. xxij.
Conserve of Succary is good against yelow black coler, in ye burnig heat of hot
fevers.

The virtue of the conserve of Elder flowers. Cap. xxiij.
Conserve of the flowers of Elder is good against the morphewe, it cleanses the
stomach, and ye whole body from scabbs. Gather the clusters, or bunches whereon
ye flowers grow when they are new blown and spread: lay them upon a fair
sheet abroad in a Chamber a day or two till ye shall perceue ye flower will
shake off and fall away, then pike them clean, and make thereof conserve, as
ye do of other Flowers.

And whereas it is more wholesome then pleasant, therefore put some other conserve
(such as ye lust) amongst it, when ye will occupy it.

The virtue of the conserve of Sorrel. Chapter. xxiiij.
Conserve of Sorrel is good against al unkind heats, of the stomach and other
principal parts of the body, and against yellow collar.

Take leaves of Sorrel, wash them clean, and shake of the water clean, or
else tarry till the water be dried clean: beat them, and grind them with Sugar
as above, and then keep them.

The virtue of the conserve of Maiden heaire. cap. xxv.
Conserve of ye leaves of Maiden heir is good against the sickness of the
side, called the Pleuresy, and for al diseases of the breast, and of the
lights, and in all maladies of Malencoly, and against red coler, make it as you
do of sorel.

To make conserve of Elecampana Roots. cap. xxvi.
TAke the roots of Elecampane wash the clean, slice them in to pieces as big as
your thumb, sees them in fair water, till they be tender, take them up,
powne them draw them throw a hairesiue, put thereto in the second sethig the
doble or treble weight of sugre and when the sugre is perfectly incorporated,
take it off, and keep it. See it be well styred in the se thing.

The virtue of the same.
Conserve of Elecampana is good to comfort ye stomach, and the noorishing
mebers, it marvelously loses tough flewme, desolueth, and consumes the same,
by the siege it avoids it.

To make conserve of Acorns, or Gladon. With the virtue of the same. chapter.
xxvii.
TAke the roots of yellow flower delice which grows in moist grownde,
otherwise called a Flag root, wash them and scrape them, sees them. and
order them as ye do of Elecampana now last before rehearsed, and so keep it.
This conserve is good against all sickness of the brain and synowes, and
against all deseases of fleume, unto women it oppeneth natural course and
terms.

And you must generally learn, that in making conserves, Fruit and Roots are
made with fire and seething: but Flowers are made without fire or seething.
Moreover the more Sugar or Honey is put into the, so it be not past.iii.ii.
to.i, the conserve shall continue the better.

To make Marmalade of Quinces. Cap..xxviii.
AFter that your Quinces are sodden, ready to be kept condict as before in the
chapter is written, then with some of the liquor wheri they were sodden (but
without any spice) beat them and draw them as ye would do a Tart, then put
some over they fire to seethe softly, and in the seething strew by little
little of powder of sugar, ye weight of the Quinces, or more, as your taste
shall tel you stir it continually, put there to some pure rose water, or damask
water, let it sees on height till it be w^l standing, which thing ye may know,
by taking some of it upon a cold knite and let it keele, if it be stiff, then
take it off box it while it is warm, and set it in a warm and dry air, if
you will gylde your Marmalade, do as before is spoken of a Marchpane.

The best making of Marmalade is when the Quinces have lain long are through
ripe, and very yellow, as in lent season.

And forasmuch as Quinces are bynding, and therefore not good for some
sickefolkes costife, it is necessary to put a good may of ripe apples of good
verdure, as Renet, Pyppen, Lording, Russetyng, Pomeriall, Rex pomoru, or any
other apple that is pleasant raw among them, being first drawn, for a tare and
then sodden among the other matter of Quinces. Thus shall you make your
Marmalade, somewhat souple, and also increase the quantity and verdure of the
same, specially if it be well dashed with sweet water.

To make Marmalade of Damsins or Prunes. Cap. xxix.
TAke Damsins which are ripe, boyle them on the Fire with a little fair water
till they be soft, then draw them through a course Boulter as ye make a tart
set it on the Fire again seethe it on height with sufficient sugar, as you do
your Quinces, dash it with sweet water. c. and box it.

If you will make it of Prunes, even likewise do put some Apples also to it, as
you did to your Quinces.

This wise you may make Marmylade of Wardens, Pears, apples, Medlars, Seruits
or Checkers, strawberys every one by him self, or else mixed it together, as you
thik good.

To make conserve of Strawberies, With the virtue of the same. chapter. xxx.
TAke Strawberies.i. quart clean picked and washed, set them on the fire till
they be soft, strain them put thereto two times as much sugar in powder, as
weight of the strawberies, let them sees till the sugar be incorporated with ye
straberis put it in a Glass or earthen Pot well glased.

The virtue of the same.
The conserve of Strawberies is good against a bot liver, or burning of the
stomach, and specially in the seruent heate of an ague.

Thus make conserve of Damasins and Prunes.

* To make conserve of Cherries and Barberies. Cap. xxxi.
Likewise ye must make coserue of Cherries, and also of barberis saving that
these require more Sugar then the other do which are not so sour as they be.

Here is to be noted, that of conserves of Fruits my be made marmalade, for
when your conserve is sufficiently sodden, and ready to be take off the sees
it more on height and it will be Marmalade.

Moreover same make their conserve, Marmalade Syrops with clean Sugar, some
with clean Honey clarifyed, some with Sugar and Honey together. And after the
opinion of diverse great Clarks, Honey is more wholesome, though it be not so
toothsome as sugar.

* To make Succade of Peels of Oranges and Lemons. Chapter. xxxii.
First take off your Peeles by quarters and feet hthem in fair water
from.iii, quarts to.iii. pynts, then take them out, and put to as much more
water, and seethe them like wise, and so do again, till the water wherein they
are sodden have no bitterness at all of the Peeles, then are they ready. Now
prepare a Syrop as ye do for quinces condict in syrop in ye. xiiii. chapter
before written: sees them in the Syrope a while, a keep them in a Glass or
Pot.

To make green Gynger. chapter. xxxiii.
TAke the Rases of cased Ginger of the fairest, and use them as follows, lay a
broad lane of fair sand upon a low flore on ye ground half a foot thick,
then lay your Rases of Ginger upon the sand in order, cover the Ginger with
more sand.iiii. or.v. fingers thick. sprinkel the sand over fair with water,
twice every day, that it be moyste, thus daily do till ye shall perceive your
Rases to be soft. Then take up your Rases: wash them scrape them clean, have a
Syrop ready made as above is said, sees them in it till they be well
seasoned, take them up and with some of ye Syrop cast the, or put the in a pot
of stone.

To make Pepper soft: with the virtue of the same.
AFter the same manner with sand ye may make pepper soft and with like Syrop
season kept them. Ginger Pepper in syrop comfort a cold stomach, helps
much to good digestion.

To make all kind of Syrops. chapter. xxxiiii.
TAke Buglosse, Borage, white Endiue, of each.i. handful, of Rosemary, Time,
Isop, winter Sauery, of each half a handful sees them (being first broken
between your hands) in.iii. quarts of water, vntoiii pints, the strain it,
and put to yliquor, whole cloves an ounce, powder of Cinimon: half an ounce,
powder of Ginger: a quarter of an ounce.i. Nutmeg in powder, of sugar half a
pound, or more: let them seethe upon a soft fire well stirred for burnning
too, until it come to the thickness of live Honey, then keep it in Gallypots,
if you put.i. pynte Malmzey in the second seethig, it will be better. When it is
perfect, have six grains of fine Musk in powder, stir it amongst your
Syrop as ye put it in the Gallypot, and cover it,

This Syrop will last many years and is excellent against swowning and
faintness of heart, it coforteth the Brain and Sine was, if it be used as
much as a Hasell Nut at once, at your pleasure.

To make MANVS CHRISTI. Chapter. xxxv.
TAke half a pownde of white Sugar, put thereto.iiii. ounces of Rosewater,
seethe them upon a soft fire of Coals, till the water be consumed, and the
Sugar is become hard, then put therein a quarter of an ounce of the powder of
Pearls, stir them well together, put for every spoonful, a piece of a leaf
of Gold cut of purpose: caste them upon a leaf of white Paper, anointed
first with the Oil of sweet Almonds, or sweet butter for cleaving too.

To make Losings. Cap. xxxvi.
TAke half a pound of Sugar, and as much Rosewater: or other distild water, as
for Manus Christi sees them likewise, and when ye will know when it is sodden
enough, take out some upon a knives point, and let it keel, and if it be harde
like Sugar then it is sodden innough: then put into it of any of the powders
hereafter next following, one ounce: stir the well together, lay it upon a
paper oiled: drive it as thin as ye think meet, lay on your Gold leaf with a
Conies tail, cut your Losings Diamond fashion, and so keep them.

Powder of Hollond against Colic, and gnawing of the belly. cap. xxxvii.
TAke Cinnamon, Anys seed, fenel seed, Cumin seed, of each a quarter of an
ounce, of shaven Lyquerice.iii. quarters of an ounce, of Gallingal one ounce
and a half, of Spyknard a quarter of an uncle, of Scene of Alexandrya.ii. ounces:
beat them al into fine powder, and serce them, whereof take a quarter of an
ouce in a mess of Potage.

Powder to make the belly soluble, causing a gentle laske: meet for noble
personages. Chapter. xxxviii.
TAke Scene of Alexandria one ounce, of fine Gynger half a quarter of an ounce,
of Anys seed a quarter of an ounce, beat them into fine powder and serce
them, put of this powder into your sod Sugre, and make Losynges as before: of
the whole, ye number of xvi. whereof disolue two of them in a mess of Potage, or
in a Cup of Mine fasting in the morning, and fast one howre after, if you do
put as much of sugre in powder, as the weight of the whole powder, ye may
keep it in a Bladder, and the whole powder will serve.viii. times to receive,
as even now is said.

A receipt to restore strength, in them that arr brought low with long
sickness. chapter. xxxix.
TAke of the brawn of a Fesant or Pattridge, and of a Capon sodden or roasted,
of each a quarter of an ounce, steep them in rosewater two hours, of the
Kernels of Nuts called Pistaciorum of the kirnels of ye pine apple, of each a
quarter of an ounce of Cinimon, in fine powder the weight of twenty Barley
corns, of ye Spices of Dianthos, diamargarition, Letificantes Galent, of each
the weight of forty grains, or barley corns, of the seed of Million, pepon, Go
orde, and Cucummer, of each the weight of ten grains, the skin taken of, let
them be all grownde small, then take.vi. ounces of sugar, dissolved in borage
water, seethe it on haighte as for Lofinges, and when it is sodden enough, the
put in al ye other gear, and make Losings thereof. Whereof one is sufficient at
once disolued in a mess of Potage, or a draft of drik: thus do, it. or.iii.
times every day.

To make Ipocras. Cap. xl.
TAke of chosen Cinimon, two ounces, of fine Gynger one ounce, of Grains half
an ounce, bruise them all, sleep them in. iii. or. iiii. pyntes of good
odiferous wine, with a pound of Sugre by the space of. xxiiii. hours. then put
them into an Ipocras Bag of Woollen, and so receive the liquor. The rediest and
best way is to put the Spices with the half pownde of sugre, and the Wine
into a stone Bottle, or a stone pot stopped close. and after: xxiiii. hours it
will be ready, then cast a thin linen cloth, or a piece of a boulter cloth on
the mouth, let so much run thorough: as ye will occupy at once, and keep the
vessel close, for it will so well keep both the sprite, odour and virtue of
the Wine, and also Spices.

A violet powder for wullen clothes and Furs. cap. xli.
TAke of Ireos. ii. ounces, of Calamus aromaticus. iii. quarters of an ounce,
of Cypress, or gallingal, of Spiknale, of Rose leues dried, of each a quarter of
an ounce, of cloves of Spyke: or Lavender Flowers, of each half an ounce: of
Nigella romana, a quarter of an ounce: of Beniamin, of Storax calimit: of each
half an ounce. Let them be all finely beaten, and serced, then take two or
three grains of Musk disloue it in rose water, and sprinckell the water upon
the powder, and turn it up and down in the sprincklyng, till it have drunk up
the water, when it is dry, keep it in bags of sylke.

* A sweet powder for Napery and all Lynnen Clothes. chapter. xlii.
TAke of sweet Mariornm, (that is whore, that is the sweeter) when it hath in
him Seeds ripe, cut the branches, so that the Root may spring again, when
this Mariorum is dried, then rub out the sedes and keep them to sow about
Easter, and the Husks or leues that grow about the Seeds take for your
purpose, rub them small between your hands (for if you beat them to powder
in a Mortar, they will loose the most part of their savor) then take of white
Saunders, or of grey Sanders, but look that they be new of right sweet odour,
for if they be old, and have no pleasant and quick odour, they are nothing
worth, take I say of these sweet Saunders beaten into fine powder one ounce,
and put it to an ounce of your sweet Mariorum rubbed between your hands as
before is said, and if you put one or two Grains of Musk thereunto (for your
wearing linen it is the better) sow these up in a sylke bag together, lay it
among your Linen, of such bags have a dozen or two, which will continue many
years, and when you look to your Linen: then chafe each of the bags
between your hands, that they may yield our their sweet odour. Moreover in the
Summer time, gather red Roses in fair whether, so soon as they be blown,
opened, lay them upon a Table, a Bed, or a fair flore of boards, and now and
then remove them least they mould, and wax foysty, when they are dry, pick off
ye leaves, that you may have. ii. peckes of them, then strew them among and
between the boughts and foldynges of your Linen, with. i. handful of of dry
spike flowers, to. vi. handful of dry Roses, and lay your sweet bags amongst
them. Be sure that your lynen be euerthrough drier ye lay them up, for else the
Roses will wax whore, set your coffer in a dry air, and in the winter time,
or in wet whether, when ye perceue your Roses to wax moist, the put them into a
pyllow bear or twain, that they fall not out, and lay them upon your bed
between the Coverlet and the Blancket, all night, or else before the fire, let
them dry, and strew them again.

Moreover ye must always have a bag full of dry Roses in store, kept in a dri
air, for if he loose his readnesse, the loses the rose his swetnesse.

Fynally ye must every year, put away your old Roses, and occupy new, out
keep your sweet Bags styll many years.

* To make a Pomeamber. cap. xliij.
TAke of Beniamin.i. ounce, of Storax calamit half an ounce of Labdanum the
eight part of an ounce, beat them to powder, put them into a brason Ladle with
a little damask or Rose water, set the over the fire of Coals, till they be
desolved: and be soft like wax: then take them out and chafe them between
your hands as you do wax: the have these powders ready finely serced, of
Cinimon, of Cloves, of sweet sanders grey or white, of each of these. iii.
pouders half a quarter of an ouce mire ye pouders with ye other and chafe the
well together, if they be to dry moysten them a little with some of the Rose
water left in the Ladle, or other: if they wax cold, warm then upon a Knives
point over a Chafingdishe of Coals, then take of Amber grease, of Musk and
Civet, of each, iii. grains, desolve ye Amber grease in a Silver Spoon over
the bot Coals, when it is cold, make it small, put it to your Musk and Civet,
then take your Pom, that you have chafed and gathered together, and by little
and little, (with some sweet water if need be) gather up the amber, musk civet:
and mix them with your Ball, till they be perfectly incorporated, then make one
Ball or two of the lump as ye shall think good, for ye weight of the whole is
above two ounces, make a hole in your Ball, so hang it by a Lace.

If you perceive that ye Ball is not tough enough, but to brittle, then take a
courtesy of storax liquida, and therewith temper your Bal against the fire, but
take not to much storax liquida, because it is too strong.

Or ye better way is, to have some gum called dragagathi ready disolued in sweet
water, it will be desolved in. ii. days, with ye gather your Ball with ye heate
of ye fire: this Ball will be of like goodness within as without and of great
price. Some men put in ye making hereof. iii. or. iiii. drops of the Oil of
spike, beware of to much, because it is very strong.

When ye will have your Ball exceed in sweetness, break it have ii. or. iii.
grains of Musk. or Civet or Amber grease, as you delight in, or al together,
desolve them in rose or Damask water, with the same chafe your Ball over the
fire till al be drunken in, then pearce a new hole as before.

* To make a fine Fumigation to cast on the Coals. cap. xliiij.
TAke of Beniamin.i. ounce, of Storix calamit half an ounce disolue them as for
a pomeam ber, then have ready these woods in powders or one of them, Gyniper, or
Cypress, or of white Sanders, of Cloves, of either half a quarter of an ounce,
al in fine powder, mixed them all together: and with some Storix liquida gather
the together with the heat of fire, then make the rownde of the bigness of a
black sloe, and with your Seal print it a Cake while it is warm and soft.

Of these cast one or two upon a Chafingdishe of Coals, to purge all
pestifferous infection, and corrupt airs, out of your house: if you put to
the other things, the powder of Amber beads it will be the sweter.

Some put also Labdanum, as before is said in making of the pomeamber, hearein
do as the savor thereof shall please you.

To make the same in Oseletts. chapter.xlv.
TAke a little of the fine powder of Sallow, or wyllow Coals, mix it wtsom of
your fumigatio last before named, in the making work them well together. then
fashion it with. iii. or. iiii feet like a Clove. and when it is dry kindle
the end of it at a quick Cole, it will yield a sweet savour, put not to much
coals for the it will savor of the, put not to little Coals* for then it will
not keep fire: put not to much Storax liquida, for then it will be too brittle
and to moyste, and will not lightly dry: therefore it shall be well to have some
Gum of ye cheritree or Plumtree, which they call Gum Arabic, disolue some of
it in sweet water till it be liquid and tough, with this gather your Oselets,
or other Fumygations.

A moyste fume upon a fuming dish. chapter. xlvi.
TAke a piece of your Pomeamber as big as a hasel Nutt, bruise it, put it into
you fumeing dish, with sweet water, put thereunto a few bay leues, as much of
dried Basell leaves, a little rosemary, and set it over the fire, upon a
Cubbard: or else in the stead of the Pomeaber, put.ii. or. iii. of ye cakes
before written broken small,. ix. or. x. whole Cloves, and if you will have it
excellent sweet, then put. i. or. ii. grains of Musk, and let the leaves them
stand over that fire together, as before is said.

A Fumigation for a Press, and clothes that no Moth shall breed therein.
chapter. xlvii.
TAke of the wood of Cypress, or of Ieniper, of Rosemary dried, of Storax
Calamit, of Beniamin. of Cloves, a like weight beaten all in to powder, then
take of ye powder of Wormwood leaves dried as much as all ye others, mix them
well together, cast thereof upon a Chafyngdish of coals and set it in your press
and shut it close, thus do ofttimes till you have well seasoned your Press or
Coffer.

* A Powder wherewith to make sweet waters. cap. xlviii.
TAke of the wood of Cipers, or the roots of Galingal. i. quarterne. Of Calamus
aromaticus. i. quarterne. Of Orace or Iris one quarterne. Of Cloves. i
quarterne. Of Storix Calamit, one quarterne. Of Beniamin, one quarterne.

Or ye may take of each of these, one ounce for a proportion, let all be beaten
into powder: and when ye will distyll your Roses, fill your Styll with Rose
leaves: and a few Spick Flowers, upon the top of them, strew some of your
pouders, so distill them. Some put a little of the powder of Nigella romana: to
the other powders. These cakes will be very sweet: put the water in a large
glass, and to the pottle, put. xii. grains of Musk, let it hang in the
midst of the water in a thin Linen cloth with a thread, set it in the son.
xx. or. xxx days, then take the Glass in, and set it in a dry air.

* An other manner of making of Damask water. cap. xlix.
TAke of Arace or Iris, of Spike flowers dried, of Cloves, of each i. ouce, make
the in poder, put them together with a pint of new Ale in corns, and. i. pynte
of Rose water, into an earthen pot: put thereto a good many of grene Rose
leaves, let them soak in it, a night time, stopped close, in the morning when
ye will distyll, first lay other Roseleues in the bottom of your Stilitory for
fere of cleuing to, then take of the Rose leaves, out of the Pot, and put them
with other green Rose leaves in your Stilitory sufficient, and to the water:
put Musk as above is said. This water is excellent to set forth a Carte, an
Apple moyse, or Almond butter.

To perfume Gloves. cap. l.
TAke the Gloves, wash them in Rose water, or Damask water, till the scurfe of
ye Leather be gon, and then stretch them forth softly, and keep the water, you
wash them with styll: Then hang them up to dry, and then lay them in a clean
lynnen cloth that is folded. iii. or. iiii. doubles: and when they be dry,
let them lye in Rose leues dried, a day or two: then take Oil of Civet Almons,
and Musk: and grind them together up on a Marble stone. Stretch them forth
softly, and with your hand annoynte your Gloves. iii. or. iiii. times: ever
among stretch them forth, then let them dry, and ever stretch them forth
softly as they dry Then take Sandifer mixed with a little Ambergreace, and
strew the powder of it thinly upon them and lay them in a Paper: and in a
Box, or else melt the Amber grease with a quantiti of Rose water, and mix the
Sandifer to it, and so annoynt the Gloves with the same. Then let them dry, and
lay them in fair white papers.

2. To perfume Gloves another way.
TAke the Gloves wash them as aforesaid. iii. or iiii, times wring them every
time softly: then take Gum of dragagant, and stepe it in fine Damask water one
night, then strain ye water through a fine Linen clothe, and take the Gum and
mix it with an ounce of Amber grease, and a quarter of an ounce of Musk,
first grynde your Amber grease with Oil of Turpentine, then mingle al together,
roll your Gloves with the same: lay them to dry, lay a paper between.

3. A preparative for Gloves.
Wash ye Gloves as before is said, till the sent of the leather be gon, then
take Beniamin. ii. ounces, of Storax Calamit. i. ounce, let them be very fine,
then take oil of Civet Almons and mingle it with Beniamin Storax upon a
Marbell stone: When it is well ground, put it into an earthen Pot with more
Oil of Civet Almons, then put in Cloves in powder, and so let it stand very
close covered: and when you need, take a little Rose water in a Sponge, and rub
the Gloves softly, then in like manner with the Oil called Civet Oil for the
same purpose.

4. Another way.
TAke twelve Grains of Musk, six grains of Civet. viii. grains of
ambergrece. iii. grains of storax Calamit. vi. grains of Beniamin and a few
Cloves: grynde all these together, with Oil of Civet Almons. First wash your
Gloves: with Fusses, disolued a day in Damask water.

5. Another for Gloves.
TAke your Gloves wash them in rose water once or twice, till all the scurffe be
gon fro them and then let them dry, and stretch them well out, fyngers and
all: Then plain them, and wash them once or twice, then take two ounces of
Storax, and as much Beniamin made in powder: Dress your Gloves all over, on a
smooth board before they be dry, then hang them to dry, and when they be dry,
save the powder that is left, then take a pynte of Rose water, and. ii. ounces
of Storax, and two ounces of Cinimon, put all these in fine powder, and cast
them to the rose water, and let the seethe in a close Posnet covered. Then take
a fine Brush, and brush them over.

6. An other way to perfume.
TAke Amber greece a dram, of Musk half a dram, of Fusses a dram, of Civet
half an ounce, put all these together in a pynt of rosewater, or Damask water.

7. An other way.
TAke a dram of Amber greece, a dram of Beniamin, half a dram of Fusses, a
dram of Storax, a quarter of an ounce of Labdanum, put all these to
Rosewater.

A perfume for Chests and Cubbords: And also for Gloves. cap. lj.
TAke Beniamin and Storax, of each one ounce, Labdanum, and Fusses, of each a
quater of an ounce, half a Dram of Civet. If you burn it for Chests, or
Cubbordes, beat it in a hot Mortar. If it be for Gloves, boyle it and put it
to Rose water.

* To colour Gloves. Cap. lii.
YOu must have Hulles of green Walnuts, that must lie in water all the year
long: roll them well with these Hulles, make them as deep a couller as you
may.

How to couller Gloves yellow within.
TO colour Gloves yellow, within take ye yolks of xx. Eggs, put them in a
fryinge pan, with a soft fire, stir them ever, and bruise them with a ladle,
the Oil that ascends of them, being anointed on the in side of the Gloves,
will make them loke yellow.

To make Musk Soap. cap. liii
TAke strong lye made of chalk, and six pound of stone chalk: iiii, pound of
Dear Suet, and put them in the lye; in an earthen pot, and mingle it well,
and keep it the space of forty days, and mingle and styr it. iii. or. iiii.
times a day, till it be consumed, and that, that remains. vii. or. viii.
days after, then you must put a quarter of an ounce of Musk, and when you
have don so, you must al flyrre it, and it will smell of Musk.

To make red sealyng wax. cap. liiii.
TAke to one pound of Wax.iii. ounces of clear Turpentyne in Summer, in Winter
take four: melt them together with a soft fire: Then take it from the fire
and let it cool: Then put in Vermylion very finely ground, and Salet Oil,
of each an ounce, and mix them well together, and it is perfect good.

To keep Damsins in syrop.
TAke Damsins pick them with a knife, or a pi the take clarified Sugar as much as
you shall think will serve them you must boyle it till it be as thick as
birdlime: Then boyle your Damsins in ye clarified sugre, till they be soft, the
take the up, and put them in a glass, then you must boyle ye syrop, till it be
thick as ye other was, before you put in ye Damsins, as soon as it is so thick
you must power it into the Damsins and so cover them close.

For the gnawing in a Woman's stomach.
TAke a good handful of Spermit, and a handful of Worm wod, and heat a tile
stone, lai these, ii. thigs on it, make a little bag, when the herbs be hot,
put the in ye bag, so lay them to her stomach.

To make sweet Damask powder four manner of ways. cap. lv.
TAke. ii. or. iii. handfuls of dried Rose leues ii. grains of Musk half an
ounce of Cloves and beat these all to powder.

2. An other way
Take. vi. ounces of Orace. iiii. ounces of Cloves. ii. ounces of florax
Calamite. i. ounce of Labdanum ii. ounces of yellow Sanders and a little Musk.

3. An other way.
Take. ii. ounces of Cloves. iiii. ounces of Spruce, iiii. ounces of Storax
calamit. iiii. ounces of Roses. iii. ounces of Beniamin.

4. An other way.
Take. iii ounces of Sypres. iiii. ounces of Beniamin, ii. ounces of Coleander
or Labdanu, iii. ounces of Storax Calamit, ii. ounces of Roses, beat all these
to powder.

To keep Barberyes. cap. lvi.
TAke claryfied Sugar, boyle it till it be thick, which you shall perceue if
you take a little between your fingers it will rope like Birdlime: Then put in
your Barberyes, and let the boyle with a soft fire, until you perceive they be
tender, the put them in a Glass and cover them: and so keep them.

To make fine Rise Porridge. cap. lvii.
TAke half a pound of Iordyn Almons, and half a. li. of Rice and a gallon of
running water, a handful of Oak bark, and let the bark be boiled in the
running water, the Almons beten with the hulles and all on, so strained to make
the Rye Porrege withal.

For the Ague in a woman's breast. cap. lviii.
TAke Hemlock leues fry them in sweet Butter, as hot as she may suffer it,
lay it to her breast and lap a warm white cotton, and it will drive it away in
short time.

For the unnatural heat of the Liver. Chapter. lix.
Take borage, buglosse, sicory, violets, fumitori, young hop buds, fenel buds,
of each a quarter of a handful, young mallows mercury of each half a handful,
boyle these in a potle of Whey and strain it.

For the Cankar in the mouth. cap. lx.
TAke half a pint of ale, a sprig of Rosemary, seethe them together, scum
your ale, and then put in a piece of Allu as much as a nut, and a spoonful of
Honey, and two spoonful of Honysuckle water.

* To know what time in the year Herbs and Flowers, should be gathered in
their full strength. cap. lxi.
MEdicines are made diverse and sundry ways, some by leues, some by sedes, some
by roots, some by Herbs, some by flowers, some by fruits: Such leues as are
put to medicines should be gatherd when they be at at their full wexing, ere that
their coullour be changed, or that they fade any thing.

Sedes when they be full ripe and the moystnes somewhat dried away

Flowers should be taken when they be fully open ere they begin to fade.

Herbs should be gathered when they be full of Sap, and ere they shrink.

Roots should be gathered when the leaves fall.

Fruits should be taken when that they be at their full growth, or when they
fall, the heavier ye fruit is, the better, those that be great and light in
ponderation choose not them, and those that be gathered in fair, whether be
better then those that be gathered in rain.

And those Herbs that grows in the Feldes are better than those that
grows in Cownes, in Gardens, and those that grows on hills in the field be
best for Medicines, for commonly they be less, not so fat, and have more
virtue. Many Herbs there be that have special time to be gathered in: And if
they be gathered in yt time, they have their whole virtue to their property,
or else not so good. Some helps when so ever they be gathered, some be nought
if they be gatherd out of time, therefore mark well what I teach thee.

Betayne shall be gathered principally in Lamas Month with the seed and the
roots, and without any Iron tool, and it shall be dried in the shadow, for
medicines it may be gathered other times, but evermore it is the better if it be
gotten without Iron, and it must be gathered before Son rising.

Swinsgras shall be gathered when it pleases in time of need.

Camimamill shall be gathered in Apryll

Perytory shall be gathered i June before the Son rising.

Red dock shall be gathered when they need daily.

Longedebefe shall be gathered in June and July.

Penyworte shall be gathered in the beginning of Winter.

Germander shall be gathered in Lammas Month.

Dragaunce shall be gathered in June and July.

Columbyne in Lamas month.

Addertung should be gathered in Apryll.

Pedelyon when thou wilt.

Groundsill always after midday.

Wall wort when it pleases you without Iron.

Violet should be gathered in the Month of March, in this month should Violets
be put into Sugre and to Syrop. Roses should be gathered in April and in May,
and of them should be made Sugar roset in Syrups of Roses, and in this same
Month should Oil be made of Camamyll.

Rosemary Flowers should be gathered in May.

Centory when he begieth to flower.

Origanum in ye Month of June.

Solsequie should be gathered the xvi. day of Auguste, before the Son rising
without Iron.

Hertstong should be gathered ere day, in November.

Aristologia should be gathered the same time.

Garlyke may be taken when you need for Medicines.

Wild Garlyke should be gathered when it flowreth.

Gurdes should be gathered in the end of September, when they be ripe, and
dried where the Son may be all day. Wild Nep beries should be gathered when
they wax yellow.

Cucumbers should be gathered when the fruit is ripe, and ye fruit should be
laid under Vines, where the Son may not have all his strength to him in a
moyste place that it may root, for than the seed shall be good and full of
kernelles.

Citrull when ye fruit is ripe and dried in a dry place in the Son.

Calamint water should be gathered when it flowreth, and dry it in the shadow,
and it will last a year.

Saffron should be gathered before that the Son doth rise.

Godur that grows among Flax should be gathered when he begineth to Flower,
and it may be kept three year.

Drauke should be gathered when it flowreth, and dry him in the shadow, and a
year it will last.

Eleber, must be gathered in Harvest time.

Fenell seeds should be gathered in the beginning of harvest, and two year he
may be kept.

The roots of Fenel should be gathered in the beginning of the year and.ii.
year they are good.

Baldemonye that some men calls G^ncian, should be gathered in the last end
of the year, and.iiii. year he is good enough. The root of this Herb is
used, and how thou shalt know him is this, that he be very bitter: the less
bitter, ye worse. Also, look that it be white whole, and not hollow within,
but sad, not brittle, nor full of powder.

Gallyngale, is called in Physic, Cipus: it may be taken at al times when thou
will, but best is in the end of Ver: and three days it must be laid into
the Son, and be dried: that the moyslure rot it not, and then you must
keep it in the shadow.

Flouredelice, should be gathered in the end of Ver, and dried in the Son,
it will last. ii. year well.

Here follows, the sundry Virtues of Rases, for divers Medicines. Ca. lxii.
ROses, be cold and moyste, in two degrees: it hath these Virtues. Stamp it,
lay it to a sore that brenneth aketh: and it shall cease both the brennyng
akyng.

Also, it is good for the Fever in the stomach, against all evils that are
gendred in hot humours.

Also, let any woman drink it with Wine, and it shall forth with restrain
bleedyngs, and help the Marowes of the womb.

Also, make Oil of Roses, that is a principal Receipt for pricking in
Sinews: the water thereof is good for sore eien, and for hot evils, and the
Oil is good for head ache to anoynte therewith the temples, and ye root of him
is good, drawing for Iron: or other thing in a mans foot, the red Rose is
much better then the white.

* The sundry virtue of Lyllies. cap. lxiii.
LYllies are cold and dri in three degrees, and so says Galyen, that who so
setheth ye leaves in water, it is a noble Plaster for Sinews that are shorted,
it is good for al manner burnings scaldings.

Also when the leues and ye roots are sodden in old Wine, and tempered up with
honi, it is a profitable plaster for sickness ye are kortten. Also the water
ye Juice is good for to wash thy brissers, and namely to do away ye frekles on
mans visage or Woman's, and the root is good to ripether with botches, and for
to help to break them.

Of the sundry virtues of Milfoyle. Chapter. lxiiii.
MYlfoyle is not and dry in. ii. degrees, it is good to staunch the blody flyr,
the juice thereof heleth the biting of a red hound, and if it be sod in red Wine,
drink it, it sleeth worms in ye womb, and it will destroy venom, and it
softneth hardness in mans womb, and it helps Iawnes Dropsye.

Also take the herb and stamp it, and temper it with Vinegar, and it will do
away blode in wounds, and it will cease the toothache, when it is chewed
fasting. Also it is good for the stinging of an Adder when it is sodden in
wine, drink it, and lay the substance thereto, and it will draw out the
Venom of the sore.

Of the sundry virtues of Rosemary. Chapter. lxv.
ROsemary, is hot dry: take ye flowers thereof, put them in....a clean cloth,
boyle them in fair clean water, until half be wasted: and cool it, drink
that water, for it is much worth against all manner of evils in the body.

Also, take the Flowers, make powder thereof, and bind it to thy right arm in
a lynnen cloth, and it shall make thee light and merry.

Also, eat the Flowers with honey fasting with sour bread, or else with other
bread, and there shall rise in thee none evil swelling.

Also, take the Flowers, and put the in thy Chest, among thy clothes or among
thy Books, and Moths shall not destroy them.

Also, boyle the flowers in Gotes milk, and then let them stand all night
under the air covered, after yt give him to drink thereof that hath the tisike,
he shall be helped.

Also, if there be any man that is ramage: take the Flowers and the leaves, a
great quatytie, and boyle them together in a good quantytie of clean water, in
that, Paciens bulneat: and it shall heal him.

Also, boyle ye leues in white wine and wash thy face therewith, thy Beard, and
thy brows, and there shall no corns spring out, but thou shalt have a fair
face.

Also put the leues under thy head, and thou shalt be delivered of all evil
dreams.

Also, break ye leues to powdre, lay the on the caker, it shall slep it.

Also, take the leaves, put them into a wine vessel, it shall keep the wine from
all sowrenesse and evil savours, and it thou will sell thy wine, thou shalt
have good speed.

Also, if thou be feeble with unkind sweat, boyle the leaves in clean water,
and wash thy head therewith, and you shalt be delivered of yt evil.

Also if thou have lost appetit of eating, boyle well these leaves in clean
water, when the water is cold; put thereunto as much of whit Wine, then make
therein Soppes, eat thou thereof well and thou shalt restore thy appetite again.

Also if thou have the Flux, boyle the leaves in strong eyzill, and lay them
on a linen clothe, and bind it to thy Womb, and a none thy Flux shall be with
drawn.

Also if thy Legs be blown with the Gowte, boyle the leaves in water, and then
take the leaves bind them in a linen cloth, and wind it about thy Legs, and
it shall do thee much good.

Also take the leaves and boyle them in strong eyzyll, and bind them to thy
stomach in a Clothe, and it shall deliver thee of al evils.

Also if thou have the cough by styring or by any other way, drink the water
of the leaves boiled in white Wine, and ye shall be whole.

Make powder of the rynd of Rosemary, and drink it, and if thou be in the
pose, thou shalt be delivered.

Also take the Timber thereof and burn it to coals, and make powder thereof, and
then put it in a linen cloth, and rub thy teeth therewith, and if there be any
worms therein, it shall sley them, keep thy teeth from all euylls.

Also of the wood make a boyst to smell thereto, and it shall keep thee yongly.

Also make thereof a barel, drink thou of the drink ye stands therein and thou
need not dread of any evil being therein, and if thou set it in the field
or in thy Garden keep it honestly, and it shall bring forth much increasing of
him self.

Also if a man have lost his smelyng of the air, yt he may not draw his
breath, make a fire of the wode and bake his bread there with and eat it, and
it shall keep him well.

Also a man that hath the Got, take oil of Roses, and the yolke of an egg,
the flowers of Rosemari, and meddle them together, and do it to his sore, he
shall be helped.

A brief Treatise of Vrines as well of men vrines, as of Women's, to judge by
the colours, which betoken health, which betoken sickness, which also betoken
death. chapter. lxvi.
IT is showed that in iiii. parts of the body dwells sycknes, and health. That
is: in the Womb, in yt head in ye liver, in the blather: in what manner you
may know their properties, and thereof thou may learn.

If a mans Vryne be white at morrow, red before meat, white after meat, he is
whole, if it be fat and thick it is not good, if ye urine be meanly thick, it
is good to like, and if it be thick as Ass peace, it betokneth head ache.

Vryne yt is.ii. days red, at ye.x. day white, it betokneth very health.

Vryne yt is fat, white, moist, betokneth the fever quartayne.

Urine yt is blody, betokneth yt the bladder is hurt by some rottig that is
wein. A little Urine all fleshye, betokneth of ye rains, who pisseth blode,
without sickness, he hath some vain broken in the rains.

Urine yt is ponderous, betokneth that the bladder is hurt.

Vryne that is some what blody of sickness betokneth great evil within the body,
and namely in ye bladder. Vryne that falls by drops above as it were great
bolnes, betokneth great sickness and long.

Woman's brine yt is clear shining in the vrynall as silver, if she cast oft,
and if she have no talent to meat, it betokneth she is with child

Womanes Vryne that is strong and whit with stinking betokneth sickness in the
rains, and in her secrete receipts, in her Chambers full of evil humours and
of sickness of her self.

Woman's vryne that is bloudye and clear as water under, betokens head ache.

Woman's Vryne that is like to Gold, clear and mighty, betokens ye she hath
lust to man.

Woman's urine that hath colour of stable clensyng, betokneth her to have the
fever quartayne, and she to dye the third day.

Woman's vryn yt appears as colour of Lead, if she be with child, betokneth
yt it is dead within her.

Here follows all the vrynes yt betoken death, as well the brine of the man, as
of Woman.
IN a what Axcis one partred another black, another green. and another blew,
betokneth death.

Vryne in what Axcys black and little in quantytie; fatty, stinkig betokneth
death.

Vryne over al colloured as Lead betokneth a prolonging of death.

Vryne dark above and clear beneth, betokneth death.

Vryne that shines raw and right bright, if the skyn in the bottom shine
not, it betokneth death.

Uryne thin in substannce, having fleting above as it were a dark sky,
signifyeth of death.

Vryne dersty, stinkynge, and dark with a black ski within, betokneth a
prolonging death.

Vryne that is of the colour of water, if it have a dark ski in an Axcis it
betokneth death.

Vryne ye hath dresses in ye bottom meddled with blode: it betokneth death.

Urine black and thick: if the sick loathe when he goes to the Privy, and when
he speaks ouertharte, or that he vnderstadeth not aright, and these
Sickenesses go not from him, they betoken death.

How to make a sovereign Water, that M. Doctor St^uyns Phisicion, a man of
great knowledge and cunning, did practise: and used of long experience. And
therewith did very many Cures, and kept it always secret, till of late a little
before his death, a special friend of his, did get it in writing of him. Cap.
lxvij.
The Receipt.
TAke a Gallon of good Gascoyne Wine: then take Gynger, Gallyngale, Camamyll,
Cynamon. Nutmegs, Grains Cloves, Mace, Annys seeds, Fenel seeds, Carawayes
seeds: of every of them a dram. Then take Sage, Myntes, Redroses, Cime
Pellitory of the wall, wild Margerst, Rosemarie. Penny moutayne: otherwise
called wild Time, Camamyll, Lavender and Auens, of every of them one handful:
Then beat ye Spices small, and bruise the Herbs, put al into the Wine: and let
it stand. xii. hours: styrringe it diverse times: Then still it in a Limbeck,
and keep the first pint of the water, for it is the best: then will come a
second water, which is not so good as ye first.

The sundry virtues and operatios of the same, many times approved.
THe Virtues of this Water be these: it comfort the sprits, and preserves
greatly ye youth of man, and helps the inward deceases, coming of cold,
against shaking of Palseye: It cures the contraction of Synowes, and helps
the conception of Women that he barren, it kills ye worms in the Belly: it
helps the cold Got, it helps the Tooth ache, it comfort the stomach
very much: it cures the col^ Dropsye, it helps the stone in the bladder and
in the veins in ye back: it cures the Canker: it helps shortly a stinkig
Breath, and who so uses this Water ever among, and not to oft, It preserves
him in good liking: and shall make on seem young very long. You must take one
spoonful of this water fastig but once in. vii. days: for it is very hot in
operation. It preserved Doctor Steeuens that he lived. lxxx. and. xviii:
years. Whereof. x. he lived bedred.

FINIS.
* These Books are to be sold at the West end of Paules Church: By Richard
Iones, the Printer hereof. 1573.


