The third and last part of the Secretes of the reverend Master Alexis of
Piemont, by him collected out of diverse excellent Authors, with a necessary
Table in the end, containing all the matters treated of in this present work.
Englished by Wyllyam Ward.

ARMIPOTENTI ANGLIAE



PRINTED AT LONDON by Roulande Hall, for Nycholas Englande. 1562.

Secretes and sovereign receptes well experimented and tried by diverse
Authors.
Against every grief or payne of the head, except the Pockes.
TAke red Roses, Camomill flowers, Melilot, Calamint, Sothernwood, of each two
handfuls, sees them in forty pound of water good wine, until half be
consumed. And with this being hot let the Patient wash his legs every
night and morning, from the knees downward, and his arms from the elbow
downward. Also he must not have his stomach full.

A preseruatine against the falling syckennesse or epilepsia.
TAke the best castoreum, that you can find, and assa setida, of each half a
Dragme, roots of Piony well beaten into powder a dragme, aromaticum rosatum two
dragmes, of all these being well mixte and mingled together with Syrope of
Mynte, make seven Pills, to be taken twyse or thryse a week when you go to
bed. It hath been often proved.

Against the falling syckennesse.
THe Patient being tourmented with this disease it is good to make him smell
burnt Feathers, or old Shoes, for that revives and makes them come to them
selves.

Another soueraygne remedy for the same.
TAke a hundred Swallows, an uncle of castoreum, as much Wine as shall suffice,
of the best that can be found. Distil all together and give the Patient drink
thereof three Dragmes fasting. This water is also very good for men that be
apoplectique if they be washed with it.

Against the Palsy.
TAke myrrh, mastir, of each two dragmes franken sense a dragme and alhalfe,
Cloves, Synamome, Nuttmegge, Lignum Aloes. Mace of each a dragme. Beat all
these into very fine powder. And the powder being sprinkled with aqua vite, and
dried again you must yet once sprinkle it again, and continuing so
sprinkling and drieng it five times. Then beat it small again. And with this
powder parfume a fox skin laieng two dragmes thereof upon quick coals to the
intent that the parfume be received through out all the skin, and so laid
upon the member that is infected. Orels (which is better) let the skin
poudered with the said powder, be laid whote upon the paraliticke member and
so worn: And you shall so a marvelous effect.

Another way.
TAke a pound of Aqua vite, the roof of iua, the root of acorus, ye root of
Isope, of each two dragmes black Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegge, of each a dragme,
Mace half a dragme: All this you must stamp well, bind it in a fine lynnen
clothe and let it steep in Aqua vite three hole days, then drene out the
water, of this water take half an uncle: water of iua and of Endiue of each
three dragmes: give it the Patient to drink in the break of the day, and
let him not eat in sire hours after. The Patient shall feel a greater effect
if the same day that he drinks the water, he also wash the sore member with
it.

Against the fransey.
THe body being purged, it is good to shave the head, and to lay upon the
seam of the crown of the head quick Pigeons (having first clefte them in the
back, and drawn out the entrails) leauyngs them so upon his head until they
ware cold: or else little whelps of a month old their garbishe plucked out: or
if you will the lunges or lights of a sheep or whether hot. But because one
of the principal causes of the fransie is the tourment of watching, you must
labour to provoke sleep as much as you can, by remedies mete therefore: as with
washing his legs from the knees downward, and his arms from the elbow
downward, with the decoction of violet flowers, of Nenuphar, of the ryne of
Mandragore roots, and annoyntynge his temples, the joints of the arm even to
the hand, and of the leg unto the foot with the oil of Nenuphar and poplar
mixed together.

A tried remedy against the great payne, ryngynge and defnesse of the ears.
TAke the oil of Castoreum two vnces, oil roset, and oil of better Almondes
of each an uncle, of Aqua vite two vnces, mingle al together and sees it until
the Aqua vite be consumed. Than every night at even when he goes into his
bed, drop four drops into his ears, and stop them with Cotton
sauourynge some what of Musk. It is a thing proved.

Another remedy well known and tried.
Sees in some pot a pound of Walnut oil, and when it smoketh, make the
smoke enter into the patients ears by a founell.

A remedy to stench the bleedyng at the nose.
TAke the juice of Plantaine, Rose water, and the best Uinaigre you can, of
each four vnces: yelkes of Eggs well beaten two vnces: of acatia mixte with
the said things half an uncle: mingle al together, and annoynte your forehead
with it and your throat with some cloth.

Another for the same well proved, and of a marvelous strength.
THe Patient shall take the water of panis porcinus as much as shall need, ye
which he shall take up at the nose, incontinent he shall feel him self helped.

Another soueraygne remedy.
TAke the blood of a man (that is to say that bledeth at the nose) an uncle or
two: and burn it upon some plate of iron, then make it into fine powder, blow
it into his nostrils, and he shall be well.

Another for the same.
TAke of the best Uinagre you can get, Plantayne water of each two pound, wet
certain lynnen clouts in it, and lay them to the souls of his feet, and
palms of his hands, and against the liver, and the blood shall furth with
stent.

For the tooth ache, a remedy proved.
TAke half an uncle of Hierapicra: two Dragmes of Hiera Picra a medicine to
purge fleme and collor.
Mythridate, and half an uncle of Aqua vite, and with all these mingled
together, you shall often times a day annoynte the tooth that aketh and round
the gomme that he stands in: for this is singular if the ache comme of cold.

Anoher remedy whether the ache be by cold or heate.
TAke strong white Wine half an uncle, of the roots of Iusquiame in Englyshe
white Henbane, an uncle: Let all be well sodden together, until the third part
or half of the wine be consumed, we this hot wine wash al the gomme of that
tooth that aketh and keep it a good while in your mouth, on the side where the
tooth is.

Another for the same.
TAke Sage flowers, Rosemary, Betony, Sticados arabic, Marioram, of each a
handefull and a half: of Nigella or melanthium in Englyshe Geth, of perythrum
in English Pelytorye of each two Dragmes. Let all this be sodden together, in
a sufficient quantity of white wine until the half be consumed: then strain
it and stamp these herbs, and make thereof a plaster and lay it upon the
Jawe of the akynge tooth, keep the wine that is strained out in your mouth as
whote as you may endure it.

Another remedy.
ALso, if the said tooth be hollow, mix half an uncle of Triacle together
with Negella and pyrethrum of each half an uncle, and a Dragme of Aqua vite.
And of this mixture fill up the hole of the tooth. But yet if all this (after
you have proved it) help you but a little or nothing, put to each of these
remedies two or three grains of the juice of Poppye, called in Latin Opium,
and lay all as is said unto the grief that troubles you.

A remedy for the stynkynge of the mouth of nose.
TAke a pound and a half of Rose water, a pound of Violet water, half a
pound of Marioram water, beat into powder Nutmegs, Lignum aloes, Synamom,
Galingale, Zedoaria, of each two Dragmes, mix all with these waters, and styll
it in a Limbecke. This done, parfume the water with eight grains of fine
Musk. The head being purged with this water, that is to say, taking it up
every day at the nose into the head: but yet fasting, and the nose first well
purged, you shall see a marvelous effect.

Another for the same.
IT is a thing proved and tried, and very good to take fasting every day at
the beginning of dinner, or else from day to day an Alephangine pill.

A very good gargarisme or gargellynge of the throat against the Quinsy.
TAke two pound of Lycorous water, the juice of Plantaines, the suck of
Mulberies, the suck of Myrtelberries, of each two vnces: all this mixte
together, sees it well: than strain it and let it cool again, and than let
the Patient gargle wash his throat slightly withal.

For the same.
IT is a remedy proved and tried, to blow with a Reed in his throat fine
powder of Plantayne leaves dried.

Another for the same.
IT helps much also to annoynt the soore with the oils of Camomille, of
Uioletts, of sweet Almonds, and of the grease of a Hen, as much of the one as
of the other, mixing it al together, and to annoynt therewith the soore place,
with the application of new shorn or vnwashed wulle.

An excellent plaster to soften or ripe an impostume in the throat.
TAke of Swallows nestes a pound, and make thereof a plaster with as much
Oil of sweet Almondes, and of Camomille as suffices to make it, and lay it
hot to the Patients throat.

Against spytrynge of blood coming of the Lunges or Lights.
TAke the suck or juice of Purselane and Playntayne of each an uncle: beat
into powder a dragme of red Coral, and half a dragme of the stone Hematites
in English bloodstone: and all being mirte together give it to the Patient at
all times when he spits blood.

For the same another remedy tried and proved.
MAke into very small powder gum Arabic, Tragacantha, Hearts horne burned, of
a bloodstone burned, and red Coral burned, of each half a Dragme, and of
Bole armenicke two scruples: mix all with the yelke of a raw Egg, and give
it the Patient when he spits blood.

Another remedy found very syngular.
Roast well two Dragmes of Rubarbe, together with the seed of Purselane and
Coriander prepared, of each a Dragme, make all into very small powder, and
mingle a Dragme of this powder with as much juice of Purselane as shall
suffice, and give it to the Patient when he spits blood.

Another remedy of marvelous great virtue.
TAke of the juice of Milfoyle two vnces, of a bloodestone burned, and well
beaten into powder two Dragmes, and give it to the patient cold.

Another secrete for the same, certain and experimented and good at all
hours.
TAke the shells of some raw Eggs, take away the little skin that is
within, and dry them so that they may be made into powder very fine. Than
mix two Dragmes of this powder with three vnces of Plantayne water, and give
the patient of it ever when he voydeth blood, and you shall se that the Lunges
will be sound. But if you will that this medicine work with more speed, and
greater efficacy, mire it with two Dragmes of the said powder, with half an
uncle of syrop of dry Roses, half an uncle of Purselane, and as much of syrop
of Mirtell, which thing you shall give ye Patient five days together. And this
thus taken he may be well assured that from thence forward the vain will never
break more.

For the same.
IT is a remedy most certain and proved as well to heal this sickennes
chanced to a man, as for to preserve one from it before it come, to eat
every morning fasting a scruple of Rubarbe roast.

Another for the same.
Every day at night when the Patient would sleep, let him sup a
sponefull of modified Barley. For, at the last, the effect is very great, as
well to preserve him, as to heal him of it.

Against the vlceration of the Lunges or Lights, and spettell full of matter
and corruption.
TAke a pound of the tails of river Creuices, and four pound of Cow or
Ewes milk: and sees all together until half the milk be consumed. And than
stamp well the tails of the Creuices or Crabs, and dissolve them in good
milk, putttynge to them half a handful of Barley flower, and as much of
amylum, of sweet Almonde milk four vnces, the yelke of a new laid egg,
and four vnces of Sugre very white: mengle all together, and s^t it on the
fire to sees, stirring it always softly, until it be well sodden. This done
let the sick man eat of this composition at morning and evening as much as
he shall think good: and he shall find him self very well.

Another for the same.
TAke vi. Dragmes of white Poppy sede, of Endiue sede draagme a half, with as
much Sorrel sede, kernels of Quinces made clean two Dragmes, the seeds of
Melons, Gourdes, Cytrons, Cowcumbers, of each an uncle and a half, of Gomme
Arabic, Tragacantha, of amylu, of each a dragme, of ye suyce of L^orous two
Dragme, of the Lunges of a Fore a Dragme and a half, Penides the waighte of
the whole, mix and burn al slightly: Than make it into a fine powder, whereof
you shall take two Dragmes, mingling it with an uncle and a half of the syrop of
Juiuves, three vnces of the water of Snails distilled* ^a^ give this drink
luke warm to the Patient in the break of ^he day.

Another for the same.
MIngle half an uncle of very white Sugre with six vnces of the milk of an
Ass new mylked, and take a little of it at the break of the morning, s^epinge
a little upon it, and at night when you go to bed, continuynge so a month at
the spring, and twenty days together in Harvest.

A remedy for short wy^ded men.
TAke an uncle and a half of Licorice made clean, with as much Cetrac the
grains or corns being taken away, Juiubes, Sebesten or Mixa of echetenne, the
root of Em^la campana. purified or made clean balfe an uncle, the root of
Fool foot or Horse hoof, called of the Apoticaries Vngula caballina, two
Dragmes let al sees in a sufficient quantity of water, until the half be
consumed, than strain it, and dissolve with that which is strained three vnces
of the best Manna, or else an uncle and a half of the flowers of Acesis, and
give it to the Pacie^ at the first time when the pain takes him, it is a thing
tried, so singular that it will heal the sick man, so that the Physician
shall be no more troubled with him.

A drink for the same disease, to be taken every day thryse.
Sees well and lunge two vnces of the Juice of Emula campana, with as much of
the Juice of Isope, and a pound of the water of Fool foot or Horse hoof:
and make thereof a syrope with as much Sugre as shall be necessary, of the
which the Patient shall take in the morning two vnces without water, and as
much as at noone, and when he enters into his bed: and as lunge as the
paro^isme and fit of his payne, it is good to put among it four drops of
gomme Armeniack, with t^ vnces of Oximel simple, and give the Oximel honny and
vinaigre sodden together.
Patient drink of it.

Another tried secret good for poor folk.
Mix a pound of wild Mallowe or marche Mallowe roots dried in the shadow,
with four pound of sodden honey well scommed: stir it upon the fire until
it be like an Electuarye, whereof let the Patient take often times, and he shall
find himself eased.

For the same, and good also for the poor sort.
TAke of clear condite water two pound, of Leeks chopped very small three
vnces, of fresh butter two vnces, of the best Sugre an uncle and a half, and
the yelke of an Egg. All this being very well beaten and stirred by the fire,
shall be given to the Patient at dinner and supper.

A remedy against the pluresye.
IT is a thing well tried that at the first assault or coming of the payne of
the side, it is very good to be let blood in the vain called Basilica, of
the opposite arm: but if the blood be let out at the fourth access or
coming, or soon after, the Pluresie will by and by void away: not
withstanding you must never let the Patient blood but his belly must first
be purged and losed, either with taking some cassa at the mouth, or else with
some soft glister.

A decoction for the stomach, very good against the Pluresye.
BEing let blood, as it appertains, take the suck or juice of Isope,
capilorum Veneris, Figs, Dates, Sebesten, dried Reasynges, modified Barley,
Licorice made cleane-of each half a handful: sees all in water as much as may
suffice, put for to dissolve in it three vnces of grained Manna. But if the
Patient be a poor man take an uncle and a half of Pulpa cassiae, which is the
inner part of it called also Medulla, in stead of Manna, and give this drink.
xxiiii. hours after his letting blood, and very early in the morning, it is
a thing certain that in proving this the Patient shall be healed, although he
were not let blood but a little before the fourth access, because the matters
and substance that nourished the disease in the larger condites are purged
away.

Another remedy most certain against all Pluresyes, as proved as divine, for
to preserve a man that he dye not of it.
MAke an ointment of two vnces of Dialth^a mirte with half an uncle of sweet
Almond eoyle, wherewith being hot annoynt the sore side, casting upon it the
powder of half an uncle of Commin stamped very small and bolted. That done,
heate a Cabbedge leaf upon the hot coals, and spread with old Butter but
not salt, laying it hot upon the grief: the payne will cease merueylouslye,
and will resolve into matter of an impostume, so that at the last you shall
have the honour of it, and the Patient health* Yet you must note that this
remedy must not be used but at the fourth access, or else after. This remedy
may also serve in every great grief disparsed thorough out al the body beneth
the head.

An ointment to rot or ripe the pluresye.
TAke two vnces of Mucilage or Mucago of the sede of Cabedge, with as much
Mucago of the sede of Marche Mallowes, Mucago of Figs an uncle, of Cow milk
three vnces, of fresh Butter two vnces, oil of sweet Almondes two vnces and a
half: mire al this together, sturryng it always upon a small fire and make
thereof a soft ointment with as much wax as shall need. This done, spread it
upon new shorn and vnwashed Wulle, and lay it upon the grief, renewyng it
in four and twenty hours three or four times.

A plaster for the same.
Stamp well in a mortar four vnces of the roots of wild Mallowes well
sodden, put to it an uncle of Butter, an uncle and a half of honny, of Pigeons
dung two Dragmes: Mingle all together, and lay it hot right upon the payne,
and soon after the corruption will break.

For the same.
IT is a remedy well proved, although it be not much used, to give ye patient
in. xxiiii. hours four times four vnces of the water Tartarum terrestre
hoate. For in so doyng, the cure shall be so fair that you shall see the
impostume broken and purged from all corrupt and rotten blood. And more over
he shall be preserved from spitting blood, and from the consumption of the
Lunges.

Against the hot cogh, that is to say, when the patient is so vexed with it,
that he can not well sleep.
TAke a dragme of the Pills of cynoglossa in English hounds tongue, with
syrope of Roses, and make thereof five Pylles, whereof the Patient shall take
one every day at the entering into his bed.

Against the same, if his voice be hoarse with it.
TAke Diacodion, and of the powder of Tragacante cold, Penides, of each. ii.
dragmes, Bole armenick a Dragme: Make all this into a very fine powder, and
with the syrop of Myrtle make Pills like Peason, of the which when the Patient
goes to his bed he shall hold one upon his tongue, and he shall be well.

A tried electuary for the same.
TAke Diapenidion without species, Loch sani experti, of each an uncle, of
Penides. ii. vnces, we as much syrop of Isope, as shall suffice for to
incorporate all: make thereof an Electurye: whereof the sick man shall hold
some in his mouth lickynge it.

Again for the cogh.
TAke a pound of fresh butter without salt, three yelkes of new laid Eggs,
two vnces of the ^owre of Amylum, and an uncle of Sugre melted in the water of
Violets: Mingled all together, and stir it always until it be well seasoned
and of a good taste. It is a good remedy which may serve you as well in stead
of meat, as of medicine.

Pylles for the cogh.
TAke two Dragmes of Agaricke prepared, mix it with a Dragme and a half of
Frankenscence made into powder, and with the juice of Isope, so make thereof
ten Pills, of the which the Patient shall take one every night when he goes to
bed. It is a remedy very good, as well for yonge-children, as for old
folk.

An ointment for the same.
TAke old Butter that is not Salt, the Oil of sweet Almondes, and of white
Lyllies of each an uncle, half an uncle of Mucelago of the seed of wild
Mallowes, with as much of Mucilago of the seed of Mallowes, and half a
scruple of Saffron: mix all together, and make thereof an ointment with a
little Ware: wherewith being hot, you shall annoynt your breast.

Against the trembling and painting of the heart. This is very good, but
especially for women, which are much subject thereunto.
TAke the Pills of dried Cytrons, Zedoariae, Doronici, calami aromatici, of
each a Dragme, of Grami Paradisi, half a Dragme, of the roots of Buglosse
dried two Dragmes, of fine Musk half a Scruple, Epithimi half a Dragme: Let
al be made into powder as well as is possible, and the powder after sifted:
whereof being mingled with the water of Turmentill, the Patient shall take a
Dragme and a half, at the break of the day, and in the evening when he will
sleep a Dragme. And he shall see him self rid and quit of his pain within
seven days.

A remedy against the same, and very good to restore the strength, being
weakened with to great heate of agues.
TAke two Dragmes of the best Synamom, half a Dragme of Mace, of Hyacinthes,
Smaragds of Rubies of each half a Dragme, of pierced or vnperced pearls, of
each a Scruple, of Gold and Silver beaten into powder, of each a Dragme: Let
al together be made into a very fine powder, whereof styring it with Sugre
dissolved in Rose water, you shall make little Balls of two Dragmes a piece. I
have seen my self that many have been with this confection preserved from the
plague in a very dangerous time.

Another remedy, wherewith I have always found my self very well.
MAke a drink with two vnces of the suck of Buglosse purged on the fire, and
two Dragmes of very white sugre mixte together, and drink it luke warm every
night when you go to bed, and before ten days be past you shall be cured.

An Epitheme against the same payne.
TAKE Rose water, Borage water, the water of Epithema is a medicine laid to
the region of the hart or liver to cole it.
Melissophylum, in Englyshe Balm, Sorrel water of each six vnces, of Sandal
white and rede, and of the sede of red Roses, of each a Dragme and a half,
Lignum aloes, of the flesh of the hart of a Buck, and of Hearts horne burned,
of each a Dragme, of red Coral, of Ben white and red, of each half a
Dragme, of the flowers of Buglosse, and of Borage, of each a handefull. Let
that be made into powder that can be, and let all sees together until the
third part of the water be consumed: Than put to it three vnces of the best
Malmesey, and two vnces of the best white Uineigre with a scruple of Saffron:
mingle al this together and lay it whote upon the sick mans heart, with a
linen clothe clean dyed in grain, early in the morning and at night before
supper. For admit that than he feel his grief or not: yet nevertheless this
is a thing experimented and very good.

An ointment very good for poor folk, that are not able to bye thefore said
medicine or nourishment.
TAke three vnces of yellow Nenuphar, two Dragmes of the powder of the same
flowers of Nenuphar, of red Sandal, of red Coral, and of Sorrel seed, of
each a scruple, of Perles, of Lignum aloes of the flesh of the hart of a
Buck, of each half a scruple, three grains of Camphyre, of white wax washed
in the water of Nenuphar, Cytryn or yellow as much as shall need. That which
must be made in powder, being so made, make thereof a soft ointment, wherewith
you shall annoynt the patient morning and evening about the heart, before his
meals, and he shall be well.

Another composition very good in the time of a plague as well to preserve as
to heal.
TAke an uncle of the best Triacle, half uncle of the juice of Lemons, a scruple
of Saffron, of the two sorts of Pearls, of red Coral, and of Sorrel
seed, of each half a Dragme: two Grains of Camphyre: mingle all together
very well with two or three drops of odoriferous white wine, and make thereof
an ointment: a certain quantity whereof you shall sprede upon a crimson silk
cloth, laying it hot upon the Patients heart, renewynge it morning and
evening.

Another ointment very good, and principally for children that are troubled
with worms.
TAke half an uncle of aloes epa^icum, a scruple of Saffron, two Dragmes of the
juice of Cytrons, a Dragme of pleasant white wine: mix all well together, and
spread it upon some linen clothe, and lay it upon his heart.

A remedy against the worms in yonge children.
TAke ye flower of bitter Lupines, aloes epaticu of each three Dragmes, of the
juice of worm wodde two Dragmes, all well mixed together, let it be spread
upon some cloth or clout, and lay it upon the chyldes Navel.

A remedy against the payne of the stomach.
TAke two vnces of the cromme of the bread of Bran sprinkle it with the wine of
Pomegranettes between sweet and sour, and plaintaine water of each four
vnces: press that harde, and give the wine tempered with the said water, unto
the Patient: If the pain come of the continual and great burning of an ague,
take this drink an hour before it comme and you shall find it of a marvelous
virtue. But if y^ pain be excedinge, it shall be good to give unto the Patient
this ^ following, at what hour so ever it be that the payne takes him.

Take three Dragmes of the Electuarie of Succo rosarum, two scruples of
Philonium romanum: Mire them and make thereof a Bolus, which shall greatly
profit him.

Another remedy for the same, when all other will not profit him.
TAke syrop of Roses, syrop of Wormewod of each an uncle and a half, a grain
of Opium, sees them slightly one wawme, and stirrynge it together with three
vnces of the broth of a Hen, you shall give the Patient drink.

A ^omentation or nouryshment very syngular for the same.
TAke red Roses, the flowers of Camomille, of Wormewod, of Mynte, of each a
handefull: heate the said herbs upon whote burning tiles sprinkled with white
wine, and lay them often times upon his stomach.

Another.
IT is a thing tried against the payne of the stomach so that it come not of
cold, and also to be preserved from the same, to take day by day before
meals, two scruples of Pills of washed Aloes.

Another against the same.
TAke half an uncle of washed Aloes, and three vnces of honey Roset, sees
this in two pound of water, until there remain but half, than strain it
through a strainer, give thereof unto y^ Patient, every day early in the
morning two vnces: this will beale and cure his grief, or else will preserve him
from it if he be not already taken with it.

Another remedy.
IT is a thing well proved, that the sick man take early in the morning a
Dragme and a half of the best Mythridate: straight upon it drink a draught of
Malmesey, and by and by he shall be healed or eased.

Another very good.
TAke five vnces of Camomille water distilled, and of Nutmegs well beaten
into powder half an uncle, if you give it whote unto the Patient, when the
payne hath him, he shall be eased.

Another remedy proved.
TAke flowers of Camomille, Melilot, Mynt, Pulegruin, Calamy^t, Southernewodde,
Senegre^e, seed of Lyne, of each a handefull, red Roses, Sp^ea squinanti, of
each two Dragmes, Danci, carui, Any^e, Dill, Fenel, of each half a handeful,
Galingale, Zedoaria, of each two dragmes, Cloves, Nutmegs, Lignu aloes Ma^e,
red Coral, of each a Dragme: let all sceth in a sufficient quantity of
water and edoriferous white wine until the third part be consumed: than with
a sponge steeped in whote ^ycoure nourish therewith his stomach morning and
evening before he eat, and this will bring his stomach in good state.

A nourishment very good against the same.
TAke a pound of oil of Spike made in Bal^o marie, warm it luke warm, and
with new shorn and vnwashed Wulle steeped in it, nourish therewith the
stomach, and at the last bind it upon it.

A little bag to carry about one against the same disease.
TAke wormewod, Mint, Pulegium* Calamint, of each half a handful, Nutmegge,
Cloves, Mace, Lignum aloes, of each adragme: make all into a fine powder, and
put it in a little bag, par^umyng it with odoriferous white wine, and than lay
it upon your stomach: if you continue to cary it about you, you shall feel your
self marvelous well.

A drink for the same.
I Have found my self always very well, as well for being preserved from this
payne of the stomach, as delivered of it, being troubled with it. To wit in
taking six vnces of honey rosat strained, a Dragme and a half of Nutmegs,
and two vnces of the best water of a Vine, and sees them altogether until the
water of the Vine be consumed, and in taking fasting every morning three
sponnes full of that which is strained.

Another remedy to lay to the stomach.
TAke Masticke, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each a dragme, half a Dragme of Mace,
and as much of Synamome: make hereof a very fine powder. Than tossed the upper
or neither crust of a lofe of Bran, and dip it in whote Malmesey, strewing
upon it of y^ said powder, and so laying it upon your stomach whote, the
payne will go away incontinent.

Another remedy well tried and proved, and good, chiefly for yonge children
vexed with the payne of the stomach: which is known, if they vomit or
belch.
TAke the crommes of Bran bread four vnces, roast or tossed it, and beat it
small into powder, and after incorporate the powder with the juice of
wormewodde, and mynt of each as much as shall suffice and put to it more a
dragme of Nutmegs. Of al this being mixed together make an ointment, and
laying it upon your stomach, it will ease and cease the payne, the belching
and the vomiting.

A remedy against an apostume in the stomach.
IT is a thing well tried, that if the Patient take every morning at the break
of the day, six vnces of Camomill water distilled, he shall be cured and healed
of the impostume already begone in him.

Against the same.
TAke four vnces of Emula purified, two vnces of wormewodde newly extract and
make in form of Loch, with as much Sugre as shall need, and give it to the
Patient morning and evening before his meals.

A plaster for the same.
TAke two pound of white honny, half an uncle of green wormewodde, an uncle
and a half of the roots of marche Mallowes: sees al together until it be
very well sodden, put unto it some flower of Senegren, and of Lyneseede, of
each half a handefull. Than put to it some oil of wormewodde, as much as shall
serve to make a plaster, the which you shall lay upon your stomach,
renewynge it evening and morning.

A nourishment or keeping of the stomach in his natural heate by washing or
bathing it.
TAke two pound of Turpentyne, the suck or juice of wormewod, and of wild
Mallowes of each four vnces, of fresh Butter an uncle, of Saffron a Dragme, of
oil of Wormewod two vnces: mix all, and sees it one wawme: and being whote
weate some linen cloth in it, and therewithal wash and bath your stomach
morning and evening. And you shall se that by and by the matter will dissolve.

A remedy against vomiting.
IF the vomiting come at a certain day or hour, it shall be good that the
Patient, before or at the hour that he must vomit, do eat some morsel of
tosted bread, stieped in four vnces of the wine of sour Pomegranetts,
drinking also afterward the wine.

An ointment very good against choleric vomiting.
TAke oil of Quinces, oil of Roses, of each an uncle: half an uncle of
wormewod, of red Coral, and of red Roses of each half a Dragme, of Nutmegs a
Dragme: beat to powder that which may be beaten, and with a little wax make
thereof a soft ointment, and annoynt the Pacients stomach with it morning and
evening before his meals.

Another remedy against phlegmaticke vomitynge.
TAke the yelke of an Egg roasted, a scruple of frankincense, with as much
Masticke, make into powder that which may be made into powder, and put with the
egg. And the Patient shalve well if he take of it every morning fasting.

A remedy against the Hycket oryexynge.
MYngle a pound of strong and odoriferous white wine, with a Dragme of
Galingale beaten into powder, and make thereof a drink, whereof the Patient
shall take whote, evening and morning two vnces, two hours before his meals.

Another.
IT is a thing found very good, to give the Patient every morning three hours
before he eat, a ra^ine of green Ginger, and by and by upon that let him
drink two draughts of Malmesey: and he shall quickly be healed.

Remedies against the payne of the Liver, come through ventositie.
TAke the roots of Galingale, and Zedoaria, of each two Dragmes, a Dragme of
Spica, with as much Squinantum, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each half a Dragme: Let
al be made into a small powder: and make thereof an Electuary with scommed
Honny, as much as shall need: whereof you shall take some evening and morning
before you eat.

Another of a very great effect.
Mix together two vnces of Diarhodon abated, Trium sandolorum an uncle, of the
best Rubarbe made in fine powder a Dragme, and with syrope of Succorye, make an
Electuarye, whereof the Patient shall take evening and morning before al other
meat, the quantity of a Walnut.

A remedy found very good against the Liver that is appostumate or corrupted.
TAke four vnces of Diarhodon abated, of the best Rubarbe well made into fine
powder, mingle all with the syrop of Succorye and make thereof an Electuarie.
Let the thing that the Patient shall take every morning two hours before his
meal, be of three dragmes.

For the same.
IT is a thing tried, that if you do put new shorn and vnwashed Wulle to
steep in the oil of white Lilies, and the oil Nardus celcica, lay it right
where the pain is, it shall keep that the liver corrupt not.

Remedies against the Dropsye.
TAke dry Wormewod, dry Agrimonye, dry Soldanella* of each two Dragmes, of
Spica two scruples: all this being made into a fine powder, lay to stepe in the
water of the roots of Eldern tree, as much as shall suffice, and give of it to
the Patient, every morning at the break of the day two Dragmes.

Against the same.
TAke three vnces of the juice or suck of Iris, Galingale, Zedoaria* of each
two Dragmes, of Synomom, of Cloves, of each half a dragme of Soldanella, half
an uncle. Al this being made into a very fine powder, make thereof an Electuarye
with as much scommed honny as shall suffice, of the which Electuary you shall
give half an uncle unto the Patient every morning two hours before he eat.

A drink of great virtue and strength against the wyndye dropsye.
MYngle together two vnces of the water of the rotes of Walwort or Danewort,
with four vnces of the water of Elderne tree, and in drinking this early in the
morning thyrtye days together, you shall be very well.

Another remedy very good to take after a purgation.
TAke a pound of Goats dung, with as much of Ox dung, and dry it in an
oven, and so make it into a small powder, incorporatyng it with juice of
wormewod, and oil of Rue, as much as shall suffice as it were to make therewith
an ointment. And sprede some part of it upon a lynnen cloth, laying it whote
upon the Patients belly when he goes to bed.

The next morning folowinge, take four vnces of strong and odoriferous
wine, and sees it with a hand full of Sage, and as much Rosemary, until the
fourth part of the wine be consumed: with the which being hot, you shall
wash his belly. All this done, take an uncle of Diagalanga, of Rosatum
aromaticum, ^riu sandalorum, Diarrhodon abated, of each half an uncle: mix all
together with Rosat honey, and make thereof an Electuarye; and giving him a
mouthful of it incontinent after his belly is washed.

Remedies against the Dropsy, called ascites. A drink very good to take once
a week.
TAke as much of the suck or juice of Iris or Gladiolus* as half an Egg
shell will hold, minglyng it together, with it four vnces of Melicrat, with
half a dragme of the best Rubarbe well beaten in powder. This drink being
given whote and early in the morning unto the Patient: it is a wonder to see
with what virtue and strength it works.

A synguler good Electuarye for the same, which ought to be declared or
disclosed but to your special friends.
TAke Agrimony, Cuscuta, dried Grapes, Licorice Mirabola^s, Cytrons of each
half an uncle, of the roots of Pa^s^ye, of Fenell, of Capers and Agaricke, of
each an uncle. All this gros^ye stamped must be sodden until the composition of
half the water, and strain it: and in strainyng it put to it half a pound
of Honey, and four vnces of Sugre, and sees it again until it be as thick
as Honey. This done, put to it half a Dragme of the best Rubarbe, two Dragmes
of gommie Turbith, a Dragme and a half of the leaves of Chameloe^, which hath
leaves like to an Olive, tempered in Uinaigre, two Scruples of Diagridium
corrected, of Spica half a Dragme, with as much of Ginger: and make of al
this an Electuarye, of the which you shall give the Patient twyse a week. Note
yet that the greatest quantity may not be above half an uncle. And as for you
remember to give him rather less than more, or as much, having always
respect to the strength or weakness of the Patient.

An ointment for the same.
MYxe an uncle of Vnguentum sa^da^ium, with half an uncle of y^ oil of Nardus
celtic^* as much of the Oil of Camomille, wherewith forget not to comfort
every day his Liver morning and evening, by anointing the place right
against it.

Another ointment very good.
TAke a pound of Turpentine, of Frankincense, Masticke, Myrhe, of each two
Dragnies, Nutmegs, Cloves, Galingale, Zedoaria, of each a Dragme and a half:
the juice of Walwort or Danewort, the juice of wild Cowcumbers of each an
uncle: and let that be made in powder that can be: and all put in a Limbecke,
let it distille for to have the oil of it, wherewith you shall annoynte all
his belly. It is a special good remedy, not only to aswage the swelling of
the belly in this sickness, ascites or dropsy: but also to take away al
waterye swellynge in what membre of the body so ever it be: yea it is good
also for the ache or payne of the joints, and of other parts come by cold.

A remedy against the yellow Iaundise.
AP^rgation first taken, take two vnces of ground worms dried in the shadow,
and prepared in wine* of the best Rubarbe a Dragme, of Dogs dung dried half
an uncle. Of all this together make a fine powder, and give unto the Patient
every morning an uncle and a half fastinge, and continuynge so fiftene days
he shall be well.

Remedies against the colic.
TAke two vnces of strong white wine, of Nutmegs, and Cloves, of each half
a Dragme, of Galingale a Dragme, stamp these grosselye, and lay them one
night in the said wine, and in the morning give it the Patient to drink
with a little white Sugre. And let him continue thus drinking it twice a weke
fastinge. It is a thing that I have tried to be very good to preserve a man
from the colic.

A remedy never to have the colic more.
TAke two pound of the ryne or pillinges of thick Rape roots, and four
pound of white Honey, boyle it together until the half be consumed.

Than mix with it some powder of Synomome, and Cloves, Nutmegge, Mace, black
Pepper, of each two Dragmes, and keep it in some vessel. Of the which rynes or
pillinges take every morning fasting half an uncle.

Another remedy to take in the payne and tourment of the colic.
MYxe half an uncle of the Electuarye of Dates, with a Dragme and a half of
Philonij romani and make thereof little gobbets, the which you shall give to
the Patient fastinge, ever when the pain takes him. And you must note that in
case of necessity a man may give this medicine, yea before the digestion of
the said diseases.

A very good powder that heals quickly the said sycknes.
MYxe a Dragme and a half of white Mulberrye leaves dried in the shadow, with
a Dragme of the ryne or pillinges of a Radish root dried also in the shadow,
and a dragme and a half of the little karnelles or stones of meddlars. All
being made into powder, give unto the Patient two dragmes in good and
odoriferous white wine.

A remedy which I have found to be very good for all grief or payne of the
guts or entrails.
TAke Diagalinga, and Diabuglossa^um of each two dragmes Philouij romani four
scruples, mix al together, and make thereof little gobbets or lumps: which you
shall give unto the Patient at every time the pain tourmenteth him, and
specially when he is yet fasting.

A glitter wherewith I have cured many.
TAke thirtene vnces of strong white wine, four vnces of fresh butter, six
vnces of common oil, Annice, Dill, Fennel, wild Carwayes, called of the
Apoticaries carui agreste, Dauci, ameos, carthami, of each two dragmes: mix
them sees them al until the half of the wine be consumed. Than strain it,
adding to that which is strained two vnces of Honey roset, an uncle and a
half of red Sugre, two dragmes of common salt, and the yelke of an Egg, mix
all this together and make thereof a glitter.

Another against the same.
Sees a pound and a half of strong white wine, with two vnces of hot
skaldynge water, until the said water be consumed, and make only a glister
of the luke warm wine: it is a thing tried that after the other glisters this
will help you much, if the ague be not with it.

Another for the same.
TAke eyghte vnces of the oil of Rue, three vnces of the oils of Castoreum, two
vnces of Philomium romanum. an uncle of Benedicta, of other things as before,
saving that you must put as little salt to it as is possible, to the end that
the virtue of the Philomium my remain in his. This glister is proved so good,
that where as all other will not help, it will deliver you; yea in a great
need or danger.

An ointment against the same.
TAke oil of Castoreum, oil of white Lilies, oil of Rue, oil of Cheiri, of
each three vnces: the juice of wild Mallowes, the juice of artemisia, of each
four vnces, of skaldyng water six vnces, sees al together, until the water
be consumed: than put to it M^lanthinum, Mastick, Granum Paradisil Galingale,
of each a Dragme and a half: of Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegge, Lignum aloes, of each
a Dragme. Make all this into a fine powder, and sees it again with a small
fire, and make thereof an ointment with a little wax, and so annoynt the place
where the grief is, laying upon it clean washed Wulle and warm. You shall
see a marvelous operation.

A very good receipt, which Pope cleme^t the seventh took in his last
syckennes.
TAke Masticke, Frankincense of the male kind, Mace, of each half a pound,
Galingale, Zedoaria, of each four vnces, Cloves, Synamome, Xilobalsa^i,
carpobalsami, of each two vnces: of Ginger, Cardamony, lunge Pepper, black
Pepper, of each half an uncle Turbit, Agaricke, Rubarb^, of each two Dragmes:
the roots of Endiue, roots of Buglosse, and Borage, of each two handefull:
Betonye, Rue, the flowers of Sticados, Arabic, Marioram, Sage, Rosemarye, of
each half a handful: Let al be grossely stamped and beaten together, and put
into an hundred pound of strong white wine, and let it rest and remain there
three days together. And at the three days end press it harde, and strain
the wine out, and put it incontinent into a Limbecke, for to distill out of it
Aqua vite. This done put into the water of the first distillation a pound of
man blood of the body of a very healthful and sleshie man, put it again
to distill. Do so in distilling it always until nyne times. That done take an
hundred leaves of Gold^foyle of the best and the finest that can be had, fifty
leaves of Siluerfoyle very fine, Jacynthes, Emeraudes, Rubies, Grenades, of the
two sorts of Pearls, red Coral, red Roses, of each a Dragme and a half, of
very fine Musk, half a Dragme: Mingle all this together and make it all into
a powder, putting the said powder into the last water distilled, and let it
lye in it. xxiiii. hours. That done, put all again into the Limbecke and
distil it with a small fire: The which water being thus distilled the tenth
time, you must put into some thick violle and stop it well, or else al the
water would vanish away. It is marvelous good against al cold diseases,
either within or without the body, taking of it only a Dragme, or four
drops with a little white wine. But if the disease be hot without an ague,
as other some be by reason of some hot matter, give the Patient of the said
water mixte with water of Endiue, at every time the payne takes him.
Nevertheless if you will see with your eyes the marvelous Miracle that this
water doth, give five or six vnces of it unto any syckman which hath lost al
his strength and force with a little wine, suddenly you shall see al his strength
come again to him. Also assure your selves that there is no remedy more
sovereign against the plague, and so dayne death, than to drink of it every
morning before you go o^te of your house five or sire drops with strong
wine, or with the water of Endiue: or else to wash your nostrils within and
without, with the rest of all your face with the same, or with a little wine
mixte with it, putting nothing else to it. I have found my self always
very well at all times of the plague by means of the same. Yea, namely it is
good also for those that have the disease called apoplexia or falling sickness,
if they wash their neck withal. This water is called Elisir vitae benedicti.

A remedy against the laxe or flyx^ come of choler.
TAke sire vnces of y^ suck or juice of Quinces: the juice of Endiue, the
juice of Sorrel, of each three vnces, Sorrel seed, Plaintaine seed, of each
two Dragmes: red Coral, red Rose seed, of each a Dragme Plaintaine water four
vnces: sees al together until ^he third part of the water and juice be
consumed. Than strain it pressing it harde, making thereof a syrop with as
much fine sugre as shall suffice, whereof the Patient shall take two vnces
morning and evening two hours before he eat any thing. This drink is well
tried, and very good.

Annoyntment very good for the same.
TAke oil Roset made of Olyues not ripe, oil of Quinces, oil of Myrtel of
each an uncle, red Roses and red Coral of each a Dragme: Masticke* Nutmegge,
of each half a Dragme, make that into powder that may be made, making thereof
an ointment soft with a li^le wax, wherewith annoynt your stomach and the
lower part of your belly.

Remedies against the laxe disenterycke.
TAke sire Dragmes of My^abolaus citrinis burned, Plantaine seed, Sorrel
seed, Endiue seed, and all parched of each three Dragmes: of the ^ower
Cordial flowers, beside Uiolettes, of each a handefull: sees all in a
sufficient quantity of water, wherein first some steel must be quenched,
until the half be consumed: Than strain it, mixing with that which is
strained two Dragmes and a half of the best Rubarbe parched of Pholonij per^ci
four Scruples. This drink is found very good by experience.

Another drink very good.
TAke two Dragmes of Frankincense of the male kind with as much Masticke: a
Dragme of boale Armenick red Coral, Hearts horne burned, of each half a
Dragme: of the stone called the bloodstone burned two Scruples: Make al into a
fine powder and steep it in red wine y^ binds, and so give the sick man a
Dragme and a half of it when he goth to bed.

Another remedy.
TO eat in this bloody flyre every morning fastinge half a Dragme of
Rubarbe parched, is a thing well tried and very acceptable.

Another drink very good in cac^ the Patient ^a^e therwyth any great
dolor in his belly (as often times it happens) by reason of exulceration
and ^nawynge of the guts.
TAke three vnces either of Goats milk or shepes milk, wherein must first be
quenched some red hot steel, an vn^e and a half of the juice of Plantaine,
Aromaticum rosatum a Dragme, myngle al together, and make a drink for one
time. Whereof give the Patient three days together: and the flyxe shall soon
after seas.

Another remedy when the payne is great.
TAke Myrtel berries. ii. dragmes, Sorrel sede, Plantain sede, of each, ii.
dragmes: of frankincense male three grains, of new yellow wax two Dragmes: of
Synamome two Scruples: put al this into the belly of a Turtle dove plucked,
sowyng her up again: than roast her with a little fire, and let the Patient
eat of her three or five days together. Or if you will make a Coulys of her:
and it is certain that he shall be healed.

Suffumigations or smokynges for the same. The first.
Lay an uncle of Turpentyne upon a plate of iron made hot in the fire, and let
the Patient receive morning and evening the smoke at his foundement thorough a
close stool. And continuynge so three or four days, there is no doubt but he
shall be cured.

The second.
Stamp well two poonde of the dung of a yonge ass, and dry it in an Oven,
and see y^ it burn not. This done, take a part of it put it morning and
evening upon hot coals under a close stole: to the end that the Patient
syttyng upon it may have his foundement smoked therewith. It is a remedy of
great virtue against the bloody flyre of yonge children, if first they be
purged with a little Rubarbe.

Another remedy for the same.
Sees a pound of apiastrum in English Balm, together with a handefull of
Taxus barba^us in red wine and strong vineygre of each sufficiently, until
the third part be consumed. Than strain out the wine, and the vinaigre,
byndng these herbs fast in a bag good and lunge, lay it hot evening and
morning upon his foundement. And continuing so, you shall have a good end of
it.

An ointment very good for the bloody flyxe.
TAke Trochyskes or little balls of Carabe, little balls of Terra figillata, of
each three Dragmes, Galliae mus^at^, Galliae alefangine, of each a Dragme and a
half, red Coral, red Rose seeds, Masticke, Frankincense, of each a Dragme. Let
all this be made in powder, and put in very strong red Uinaigre* xxiiii.
hours together, and afterwade dry it by the fire or in the Sun. That done,
make it all again into powder, putting oil of Quinces, oil rosat raw, or
sharpe, oil of Mastick of each two vnces, with as much white wax as shall
suffice. And with this annoynt the Patients belly.

Remedies against the swelling and oppilation or stoppynge of the Spleen.
TAke two vnces and a half of the juice of wylde-Mallowes, or marsh Mallowes
purified, two vnces of the juice of Calaminte, two Dragmes of Scene dried, and
make thereof an Electuarye, miringe al this with as much as shall suffice of
skommed Honey, and give of* it unto the Patient a sponnefull, three hours
before his meals. It is a remedy marvelous good.

A vomentation or nourishynge by washing for the same.
TAke of the roots of wild or marsh Mallowes, of Garden Mallowes, of each
two vnces, Senegrene seed, Linescede, flowers of Camomil, Melilote, of each a
handefull: Calamint, Bauline, cuscuta, Pulegium, Anyce, carui, Fennel, of each
a handefull: sees all this in a sufficient quantity of strong white
Uinaigre, and wash the place right against the Spleen, every day bathing it,
and the Patient shall be very well at his ease.

An ointment against the same.
TAke oil of Rue, oil of Capers* oil of Camomille, of each a pound: of the
strongest and best white wine you can get half a pound, roots of wild or
marsh Mallowes, roots of other Mallowes roots of Fern, of each half an
uncle: Bray well the roots, and sees them with all the rest, until there
remain no more wine: after that take it, and press out the Oil, putting it
to a pound of the best and strongest white Uinaigre with an uncle of panis
porcinus well stamped and purified, seething it well again, until the Uinaigre
be consumed, and than straining it again, press it bard that the oil may
come out.

Unto these oils thus strained out, you must put oppoponacis, Bdellij,
Galbani, a^moniaci, of each two dragmes: dissolve thy gommes in strong
Uinaigre, miring them with the other things, and seethinge it slightly once
again that the virtue of the gommes vanish not away: make thereof a soft
ointment, with very good yellow ware, wherewith annoynte the place right
against the Spleen every day morning and evening.

Another fomentation or bathing for the same.
IT is a thing experimented that if you wash or bath only the Spleen with
very strong Uinaigre wherein Pyrites, every stone of the which there may fire
be stricken.
there hath been quenched the stone called Marchasita, which George Agricola
calls Pyrites, laying the clothe dipped in it, right upon the place of the
Spiens. Doing thus you shall not seek any other remedy, for this will abate
all the swelling.

Remedies against the payne, swelling and ventositie of the Matrice.
Sees together roots of matricaria an uncle, Dauci, half an uncle, white Honny
two vnces, skommyng well the Honny until it be thoroughly sodden: and straining
and pressing it harde, myngle this Honey with two vnces of the broth that a
Hen hath been sodden in, and three vnces of the decoction of anyce, and give
the woman drnike of it ten days together: she shall be healed. Wherefore keep
it well in mind.

Another tried of some women.
TAke a dragme of Nutmegs, a dragme and a half of y^ roots of Matricaria, a
scruple of Spica, sees al this in six vnces of good white wine, until the
third part be consumed. Than strain it out, putting into that which shall be
strained two Dragmes of very white sugre, and so give of it unto the woman, at
the break of the day, and at all times when the payne shall take her.

Another remedy very good, and well known of women.
TAke a sweet apple, and make him hollow within, make a powder of Nutmegs,
Mace, Synamom, of each half a dragme, Cloves half a scruple* put all this
within the apple with a little Sugre, and roast it under hot ashes, and give of
it unto the woman ever when the payne comes unto her. But if the payne
increase so much that her life is in doubt, put to all this two grains of
opium, and suddenly the payne will depart.

Another.
TAke Calamint, Matricaria, flowers of Cammomille, of Sage, of Rosemary, of
each a handefull: Sees all in lye, or ashye water of a sufficient quantity,
until the third part be consumed with the which water wash the legs of the
woman, from the knees to the feet.

A fomentation or nouryshyng.
TAke a handful of Artemisia, with as much of the flowers of Camomille, Mynte,
and Calamynte, make hot a tyle, and power some good and odoriferous wine upon
it, and after put also the herbs upon it for to lay them so hot upon the
Matrice, at every time that the payne comes. Nevertheless, take heed that
you wash or bath her not, because that all moisture is evil for her.

A very good ointment.
Mire a pound of the oil of Cheiri with four vnces of the oil of Sureau,
heate it and annoynte the upper part of the Matrice with it, dippinge some
lynnen cloth in the oil, and laying it hot upon the Matrice. This also laid
upon a woman's belly after this sort when she is in labour, will ease and
mitigate her pain.

A plaster or cere clothe to lay upon the Matrice if the grief be old or
inuerate.
TAke an uncle of dried Matricaria, with as much of the flowers of Cheiri,
dried: half an uncle of Gallia muscato. or else alefangine, if the woman be poor
of Galbanum, Bdellium* Serapini, of each two Dragmes: Olibani, Masticke, of
each a Dragme and a half: Dissolve these gommes in oil of Cheiri, making
into powder the rest that may be made: and make thereof a plaster with a
little pitch, wax and oil of Sefanni, spreadyng it upon some leather, and
laying it upon the place of the Matrice, and renew it every eight days.

Remedies to make a woman's time to come that is let or hindered by some cause.
TAke two vnces of the juice of Sauyne, and purify it, mixing with it two
dragmes of Synamome well made into powder: four grains of Saffron, two vnces
of the water Radish roots distilled with a little Sugre, for two times: this
provokes marvelously the flowers of a woman. Wherefore beware ye give it not
unto a woman great with child. For all that provokes her flowers, makes her
also to labour before her time.

Another remedy very good also to cause a woman to bring forth the child
before the time, if the woman be in danger of it.
Mire two grains of Saffron, and two dragmes of Sugre in four vnces of
Pymperuell water, making thereof a drink, and give it to the woman at twyse,
at the break of the day, and when she goes to bed.

A washing very good for the same.
TAke Calamint, Pulegium, Sage, artemisia, Rosemarie of each a handefull,
roots of Iris or Gladiolus, the roots of Walworte or Daneworte, roots of
Sureau, of each half a handful: sees all in good white wine enough, until three
parts be consumed. Wherewith wash the woman in the morning, and when she
goes to bed, from the haunches downward. Further more, the morning after she
is washed, you shall give her to drink a dragme of old Triacle, three grains
of Saffron, and two vnces of the water of artemisia, mixte together. This is so
certain, that if she use it five times only she shall have her flowers.

Against to much abundance of flowers.
MAke a very fine powder of half an uncle of the inward skyn that covers
the kernels of wild Fylberdes, giving a dragme thereof unto the woman,
incontinent the to much coming shall cease.

An ointment against the same.
TAke the juice of Plantan, the juice of Solatrum, the juice of Rubarbe, of
each half an uncle, red Coral, Frankincense of the male kind, Mastick, of each
a dragme and a half: Coriander prepared, seeds of red Roses, of each two
Scruples, seeds of white Iusquiamum, the ryne of the roots of Mandragora, of
each half a dragme: strong red Uinaigre half an uncle, make in fine powder all
that may be made, and mingle al together, with the which being luke warm,
annoynt the souls of the woman's feet every night when she goes to bed, and
you shall see a good fortunate effect.

Against the prefocation or stranglyng of the matrice.
Sees in strong wine the roots of Gladiolus, the roots of Galamint, the
roots of C^clamen, in English rape Violet, of each a handeful, until half the
wine be consumed: than strain them, and with that which is constrained out
wash the woman's knees morning and evening: for it is very good.

Against the same of what cause soever it come.
Mire a dragme of assa faetida, and half a Dragme of Daucus, with Honey
roset, and make thereof five Pylles, and taking one of them every morning, they
are very good, as well to preserve a woman from it as to heal her of it.

Another against the same.
TAke two scruples of the best Agaricke, two Dragmes of Turpentine, seeds of
Daucus, and assa faetida, of each half a scruple, mingle them and make little
balls, of the which you shall give the woman every day. For it is a thing
very good to heal her, or else to keep her from it.

Against the same.
TAke water distiled of the roots of Daucus, of wild Poppye five vnces,
Honey roset an uncle and a half: mix al together, and give the woman drink of
it. For whether the payne be already or is like to come, she shall be cured or
preserved from it.

Against the same.
TAke two dragmes of castoreum, a dragme of the same woman's hear, mixed with a
little Rosen of a Pine tree, and make thereof great Pills as big as
Filberdes, with one of the which Pills perfume her nostrils, at the time of
the prefocation or stranglinge of the Matrice, and incontinent she shall be
eased.

Remedies to be used when the Matrice comes out of her natural place, or
falls.
YOu shall mix oil of Masticke with oil of rosat, green or raw of each two
vnces, then cupularum glaudium, the flowers of wild Pomegranade tree, the ryne
of Pomegranades, Myrtelberries, of each a scruple, of Frankincense, mastick,
Acatia, Hypocistidos half a dragme: mi^e them and make thereof a very fine
powder. And then casting it upon the neck of the Matrice and dip your
fyngers in the oil, and so put the matrice upward with them.

A plaster very good.
TAke Sorrel seed, the seed of Plantaine, and of Coriander prepared, of each
two dragmes: red Coral, seeds of red Roses of each a dragme, Hypocistidos,
acacia, Frankincense of each a dragme and a half: Galls, the Pills of
Pomegranades, flowers of Pomegranads, of each. ii. dragmes: beat al into a
fine powder, gathering together the powder, with the oil of veriuyce rosat,
making thereof a plaster with wax pitch as much as shall suffice, spread it
upon a peace of leather, a part of the which you shall lay upon the woman's
belly, right against the place of the matryce along unto both her haunches. And
this shall help her.

Remedies for the Matryce corrupted or apostumated. A plaster for to dissolve
it.
TAke the flowers of Camomille, melilot, Matricaria, the leaves of mallowes,
the roots of Uiolettes, Branckvrsyue, of each a handefull: the roots of wild
or marsh mallowes cut very small three vnces: sees it al in a sufficient
quantity of water until ye half be consumed: then put to it a bandful of
flower of Lineseede, with as much of flower of Synegrene, of Butter hens
grease, of each as much as will grease over the plaster, the which you shall
lay upon the appostumate or corrupt place. Notwithstanding remember that to
every grief of the Matrice (as we have our self well tried and proved) all
moyste fomentation or bathing is hurtful, and therefore beware in any ca^e you
do it not.

Another plaster for the same.
TAke the juice of green Camomil, and the juice Matricaria, of each two vnces:
mix them together with a pound of the plaster of Melilot, and lay it upon
the corrupt place: It is certain that doing so often times, it will wax ripe
and rot.

A plaster.
TAke six vnces of Dyaquilon without Gomme: two dragmes of Saffron, an uncle
and a half of the juice of Matricaria: make thereof ceratum or plaster with
wax, and a little Rosen of a Pine tree, and lay it upon the place of the
corruption: it is a singular thing.

Remedies against the ulcers or corrupt matter of the matrice.
TAke two vnces of the ointment of common Tutia, dissolve it well in eyghte
vnces of Ewes milk, and squirt it into the Matrice. This is very good.

A drink for the same.
TAke six vnces of new and fresh milk, myngle it with an uncle of Honny
roset, and give it to the woman ten days together, three hours before she
eat any thing. And this is also very good.

Remedies against the white flyxe of women.
TAke gomme Arabic, Dragacante, Amylum of each two dragmes, of Masticke, a
dragme: make all into a fine powder, and with a little good Sugre dissolve it in
the juice of Quinces: Make thereof balls of two dragmes a piece: of the which
give one to the woman, every morning three hours before she break her fast,
whereupon incontinent let her drink a draught of red stipticke wine, doing
the the like at night before supper. And this shall help her so that in short
space she shall be healed.

Another against the same.
TAke the yelke of two eggs raw and new laid, Frankincense of the male
kind, boale Armenick Terra sigillata of each half a dragme, make into powder,
that which may be made, mingling all together, and give to the sick woman: a
mouthful of it every morning, six hours at the least before she eat any
thing. This remedy is so excellent that I have cured many with it.

A drink.
TAke four vnces of red stiptick and byndyng wine wherein you must often times
quench first some hot Steel, gomme Arabic, Dragacante, of each half a
dragme, mingle it together and make a drink of it: Whereof you shall give the
woman fiftene days together earthly in the morning: and there is no doubt but
she shall be healed.

A powder against the same.
MYxe half an uncle of Date stones well beaten in to powder with a dragme of
Dragons blood in red wine, and give the woman one Dragme of it at the break
of the day, and another when she goth to bed, and she shall be healed.

Remedies against pyssyng whore. A Syrop.
TAke Syrop of Uioletts, and of Nenuphar, of each an uncle, mingling with it
Plantaine water, Porcelaine, of common cold seeds, of each an uncle. This
Syrop digests the choleric matter, and takes away the bytyng humours that
cause the heate in pissynge.

A drink against the same, to take three hours before dinner and at noone.
Mix four vnces of the water of Mallowes with two vnces of Syrop violet.
Drink this continually seven days: and at the eight day mix with it an uncle
of lenytife Diasebestes, with a dragme and a half of Diaprunis laratyue, make
thereof a drink with the water of the decoction pectorall, the which you shall
give to the Patient.

Against Gon^rhaea, which is when a mans scede goth from him vnwittynglye.
TAke four vnces of Ewes milk, mixed it with. ii. dragmes of Hares hear burned
and well made into powder: give the Patient drink of it twice a day morning
and evening two hours before he eat.

An ointment against the same.
TAke two vnces of Olibani, acacia, and Hypocistidos, of each two dragmes, of
Galls a dragme, Labdany, half a dragme: oil of Masticke, oil of Spike, oil
of Myrtle, of each half an uncle: Make that into a fine powder that can be made
powder, and make thereof a soft ointment with a sufficient quantitte of wax,
putting to it at the end half a scruple of Camphyre, with this ointment
annoynt his raynes and the chine of the back, his flanks and the place about
the privy members, evening and morning.

Another remedy marvelous good.
TAke half an uncle of Tutia, prepared, Sarcocolla, washed aloes hepaticum,
Sugre candy, of each three dragmes: mingle it and make it into a fine powder,
whereof dissolve one dragme in woman's milk, and therewith squirt the mans yard
a good way in, five or six times a day, and he shall incontinent be healed. But
if there be any vlceration he shall also soon be rid of it.

Remedies for them that peace blood.
TAke water of Plantain, of nightshade in Latin Solanum, Sorrel, Endiue,
Wormewod, of each four vnces, white Sandal and red, Been white and red, of
red Roses, of each a dragme and a half, Spondium two dragmes, of Spica ten
grains: of the best Uinaigre three vnces: make that into fine powder which
may be made, and make thereof Epithema for the liver.

An ointment for the same.
TAke the juice of Plantain, of nightshade, of Sorrel, of each an uncle, oil
roset, oil of Myrtel, of each half an uncle, Hypocistidos, red Coral of each a
dragme: make that into powder that is to be made, and make of it an ointment
very soft with a little wax and annoyntinge the rains of the Patient, from the
haunche unto the place about the privy members, and to the root of his yard.
And he shall be well eased.

A plaster for the same.
TAke Plantain seed, Sorrel seed, Purcelin seed, of each two dragmes, gomme
Arabic, Dragacante, of each a dragme and a half, Hypocistidos, acacia, bole
Armenicke, sylke burned, of each a dragme, Terra sigillata. Hares hear burned
of each a dragme: make al together in a fine small powder, and make thereof a
plaster with oil rosat green or raw, wax pitch, as much as shall
suffice: the which you shall lay upon the raynes of the Patient. It is proved
and tried to be very good.

Remedies against the gravel.
IT is a thing certain, that if the Patient swallow down three dragmes of
new Cassa every day before dinner, he shall never have the gravel.

Another.
TAke the stone that is found in the heads of Crabs half an uncle: burn it, and
make it in powder very fine, mixing the powder with the water of Saxifrage, and
so give it to the Patient.

Another remedy well tried, whereby I have often times found my self eased.
TAke oil of Scorpions made of oil of bitter Almondes, Turpentine, fresh
Butter of each half a pound, of Saffron a Scruple: beat all this in some
vessel on the fire, and with a linen cloth bathe and wash often times a day
from the heighte of the haunches, unto the root or beginning of the privy
members.

Against the same.
Dissolve three dragmes of he Goats blood prepared in sufficient quantity of
Broo^e flowers water distilled, and give it to the Patient.

Another very good.
MIre an uncle of the juice of grene Lemmons with three vnces of Malmesey, and
gene it the Patient to drink all at one time, when he ^eeleth his grief.

Receiptes to hasten the child birth, and to mitigate the payne of the
travail and labour.
TAke Genyper berries, and bay Berries of each seven: great Synamome half a
dragme, whole Synamom a dragme. Put al together in a turtle Doves belly that is
fat and ^eshye, and put her on a Spyt and roast her, and baste her with Hens
grease, the which you shall give to the woman every day for her supper. It is
a thing as notable as any other can be. Yet in the mean time you must note,
that none of these receipts must be given to a woman great with child,
unless she have passed the moon of the nynth month that she was with child.

Another.
TAke fresh Butter washed in Violet water three vnces, mucilago of Cabbage two
vnces, mucilago of wild or marche Mallowes, mucilago of Figs of each halt
an uncle, and mix it together. And if the woman be nigh her time, let her put
every day into the entry of her Matrice, a clout wet and dipped in this
lycour, and she shall bring forth her child without great travail and
difficulty.

Another.
TAke six pound of good white wine, Calamint, Sage, Rosemary, of each half a
hadful: sees al together until the fourth part of the wine be consumed: with
the which the woman drawing nigh to her time shall wash her legs, once a
day either morning or evening.

Another.
TAke an uncle of the pilling of Radish roots with as much Mercurie, three
grains of Saffron, a dragme of gross Synamome well beaten into powder, two
dragmes of the juice of Sauyne. Mingle and stamp well altogether, byndyng it in
some fine lynen cloth upon the neck of the Matrice. If the woman labour in
great danger, she shall suddenly be delivered.

Another remedy very good, but yet such one that may not be given but in
great necessity, or when the child is dead within her belly.
Mix together two vnces of the juice of Sauyne, a dragme of Boras mineral
well made in powder, and an uncle of odoriferous white wine, and give it the
woman to drink, and the effect will soon follow.

Remedies when a man pysseth against his will.
IT is a thing very good and tried, to give every morning to the Patient a
Cytryn myrab^lan well conserved.

Another for the same.
Take Plantaine water, ^ water* Sorrel water, night shade water, of ^ half a
^wodde water four vnces, kinds o^ Cero^ia sandalia an uncle: Spondij, two
dragmes* red Coral, red Rose seeds, Plantain seeds, of each two dragmes, of
Spike ten grains, of very good Uinaigre three vnces: mire altogether, and
with a white linen cloth dipped therein and well cleansed, wash and bathe the
Liver with it and the rains of the back. That done, take oil Roset, oil of
Myrtel, oil of Quinces of each an uncle. Make into powder that may be made, and
make thereof an ointment very soft with a little wax, annoyntynge incontinent
the Pacients raynes of the back and his belly.

Remedies against the stone in the bladder.
TAke Liton tripon, three dragmes, ten bitter Almondes with as much of y^ kernells
of Peches: bray all this well together, and make thereof little balls with
Sugre, the which you shall give to the Patient every month ten days together,
at the break of the day, ^lepy^ge a little upon it, and you shall see a good
end and issue of it.

A remedy and preservative against the same.
TAke four vnces of Turpentine, and burn it upon some plate of Iron red
whote, until it may be made into powder: of the which powder, take two
dragmes, water of Sa^ifrage four vnces, mingling al together, make thereof a
drink, which you shall give the Patient twice a weke, at the break of the day
continuing so two months together. If he have not yet the stone, he shall
without doubt be preserved from it: but if he have it, he shall also be healed
of it.

Another for the same.
TAke si^re Dragmes of Turpentine ten times washed in water, and make thereof
little balls called Bol^, with the juice of Saxifrage, and a little Sugre, and
give it to the Patient as is aforesaid.

Remedies for to heal the Emerhodes or Piles. A very excellent ointment.
THe body being purged take oil Violet washed in water of Uioletts, and fresh
butter washed, of each an uncle: make there of a soft ointment with the yelke
of an Egg, half an uncle of oil of Lineseede, and as much wax as shall suffice:
anoint the Emorrhodes or Piles with it twice or thryse a day There is no such
remedy as this is, when women lye in child bed because of the retention of
their flowers they are often times, yea almost daily molested with these
Emorrhodes or Piles very soore.

A plaster against the same.
TAke of the cromme of bran bread a pound, of ewes milk, or cow milk, or
else goats milk, two pound: Sees all together until two or three parts be
consumed: than put to it two vnces of the grease taken of the chyne of a goat,
and an uncle of the powder of ground worms, mingling al together, and so lay
it whote upon his foundement.

An exce^lent and very good hot bath or bain for the same.
YOu shall take the leaves of Mallowes roots and al the roots of wild or
marsh Mallowes, of holy^ Hocke, Violets, Cabbage, the flowers of Taxus
barbatus, Camomille, Melilot, Syngrene, Lyneseede* of each a handeful and a
half: sees al in a sufficient quan titie of water of the river, or some other
fresh water, until half be consumed: than power it whote into some tubbe,
causing the Patient to sit in it twyse a day, in the morning and at night, the
space of an hour.

Another remedy of very great virtue.
TAke. ii. vnces of the juice of leckes, an uncle of the juice of Persly, butter
made of cow milk, walnut oil* oil of y^ decoctio of ca^aputia, of each an
uncle a half, oil of Radish roots an uncle, of the suet that is about the
kydneys of a Goat an uncle and a half: let all be well stirred and brayed in a
mortar. This being hot, if you lay it with fat well upon and about the
Emorhodes twyse a day, using so thirty days long, I have proved the remedy
to be of great efficatie and virtue, that without doubt I dare assure the
Patient of heath.

Remedies against the swelling of the coddes.
TAke oil of white Lylyes, oil of Roses complete of each two vnces, of the
grease that is washed of from new shorn Wulle an uncle and a half, wet some
fattye Wulle in it, and lay it whote upon his Coddes: and then will the
swelling go away with the payne.

Another against harde swellynge.
TAke Resyns dried and carnelles pluckte out three vnces, Barley flower two
vnces, as much of the flower of white Cyche peason, half an uncle of the flower
of Syngrene, as much of the flower of Lynesede, an uncle and a half of Honey:
mingle all well together, stampynge it in a mortar, and lay it whote upon his
Coddes.

A good plaster for the same.
TAke gomme Arabic, Dragacante, of each two dragmes, Galbanum, Armoniacke, of
each a dragme and a half, Bean flower and the flower of white Cyche peason,
of each an uncle: Dissolve the gommes in oil of sweet Almondes, and a little
Uinegre, then mire all well together, and make thereof a plaster with Pitch
Wax, as much as shall suffice.

An ointment against the same.
TAke oil of white Lylyes, and oil of Camomille, of each an uncle, of Comyn
two dragmes, Labdany, Galbany, of each an uncle: Dissolve the Gommes in strong
Uinaigre, and make in powder that which is to be made: And make of this a soft
ointment, with a little Wax, wherein wet some new shorn and vnwashed Wulle,
and lay it upon his Coddes.

A plaster.
Sees a poude of white Cyche peason in good white wine, vntyl they be thoroughly
sodden: than stamp them well in a mortar, putting to them two vnces of
Camomille flower, a dragme of Saffron, two vnces of oil of white Lylyes: mix
al together, and lay it whote upon his Coddes, leaving the plaster upon them
night and day.

Remedies against the sciatica.
TAke the Blossoms or flowers of Camomille, Meliote, Syngreene, Dill,
Lyneseede, of each two handfuls: Wormewodde, Mynte, Pennyriall, Calamynt,
Southernewod, the flowers of Sticados arabic, Bytonye, Maioram, the herb
Paraly sis, Sage, Rosemarye, Germander, of each a handful and a half, sees
all this in two hundred pound of clear condyte water, until the third part
be consumed: than strain it, and sees it again well, putting to it half a
pound of quick Brimstone, four vnces of Saltpetre, prepared, and three vnces
of sait Gemma: sees them again and strain them: and than keep that which is
strained for your use. The sick man shall every morning bathe him self the
space of eyghte days together, tarrying in it an hour well covered, the head
only bare. The hour paste, coming out of the bathe, and al his body well dried
and wyped, let him go into his warm bed, and anon after let him take a dragme
of great Triacle, mixte with an uncle and a half of Sugre roset, and sleep
thereupon two hours, and in the mean time being well covered let him sweet,
and those that keep him, let them wy^e him and dry him well, and by and by
after they shall annoynt the place where the pain holds him, that is, al the
leg fro the haunch or huckle bone, with the ointment Marciaton vnguentum
agrippae, vnguentum of aragon, of each an uncle mixed together. Continuynge than
all in this order, and as I have said eight days, I dare assure ye patient
health.

Remedies against inflammations of blood, which grows into an impostume in
some part of the body or members, called phelgmone. A plaster to ripe and
rot the impostume.
TAke a pound of Cow milk that was never fleeted: a pound a half of bread well
crommed small: three vnces of the juice of Cabbage, half a dragme of Saffron,
three vnces of the oil of white Lilies mix all together, and lay it hot upon
the sore place.

Another for the same.
TAke three vnces of Diaquilum without gommes, the juice of cabbage an uncle and
a half, of Saffron a dragme: make hereof a good and fat ointment and thick with
yellow wax as much as shall need: the which being spread upon leather, the
Patient shall wear a day or two continually, and he shall find him self well.

Another to rot or ripe incontinent.
CHawe well fasting half a pound of whet, and temper it well with a great
deal of spettell: take also two vnces of oil roset complete, and a dragme of
Saffron, mingling all together, and lay it upon the soore place, renuyng it
often times. The signs of the rypenes of it are these, when it is soft, moving
up and down like a wave of water, when it grieves the Patient no more, when
the fever cease and continues no more. The impostume being thus brought to
a ripens, prepare your self to lance or pierce it. But if the Patient be
afraid of y^ iron or fire, break it with this that follows: take two vnces
of Diaquilum simple, an uncle of leven, half an uncle of oil of sweet Almondes:
mix all, and spread it upon a piece of leather, or clout, putting in the
midst of it a dragme of Pygeons donge made in powder, and so lay it upon the
place where the breaking of the soore shall be most commodious. You may also
take half an uncle of leven, a Dragme of common Salt, two Dragmes of the best
Uinaigre, four scruples of the powder of Cantarides, mix all together, bray
it well in a mortar, until it be turned into a past or do we as it were: of the
which you shall put to it half a dragme, or according to the quantity of the
matter that must come out, covering that again with the Ceratum or plaster
before said.

The impostume being broken, and well made clean, if you fear that there will
come much blood again, take incontinent the yelkes of two Eggs, two Dragmes
of Salt, a dragme of bole Armenick, and steep or dip certain pieces of tow
in it, and lay them upon the place where it is broken, and let them lye four
and twenty hours together.

Against a Ryngworme or Tetter, that runs all over a mans face, or against
the disease that is called Erysipilas or Lychen, of some Mentagra, the French
men call it feu volage, as it were a runnynge fire.
THE remedy is good to myngle at the beginning the juice of Plantaine,
Marygoldes, Solatrum, barba Iouis, in Englyshe Syngreene, of each six vnces,
with three vnces of Rose water, and wetynge certain clouts in it, lay them
upon the soore or King worm. Yet you must take heed that ye take away the
clouts, as soon as they begin to wax whote, to the end that the
heate*retournynge from the lynnen clouts to the soore, do not increase the
payne, or else that the lynnen clothes being dried with the heate do not
cleave to the skin and pluck it with them.

For if it should be so, there would be danger in it because of the ulcers or
scabs that would come of it.

Another remedy very good to heal the same, when it doth but begin or
increase.
TAke Lytarge of Silver, si^e vnces, the juice of Plantaines three vnces, oil
roset two vnces, of the best Uinaigre an uncle, mix and bray all this well in a
mortar of Lead until it be like an ointment of the colour of Lead, of the
which being spread upon some lynnen cloth you shall lay some upon the soore,
renuyng it evening and morning, and looking to it diligently until you be sure
of the state of it and of the increase. When it begins to decline (which
thing you shall know because it will change from a white colour unto a red)
take heed you lay no cold thing unto it: for it may be that you may make
some dead flesh red and dark come or grow in it, and so there should be
great danger, that by reason of the cold things the Kingworme or ^etter
should turn into an Hestiomem. But my counsel is to take the flowers of
Camomille, Melilot, Syngreene, of each a handful; and to sees the same in
sufficient water until there remain but the half. Than to strain it, and to
wash every day the place with a sponge wet in it: and afterward to wash it
with some-whote white wine. For that is it that keeps the member from
mortifying in such a disease. If the thing be grown to an ulcer, either by the
folly of the Physician, or else by the evil government of the Patient, or by
the evil matter which could not be amended by medecines, take lytarge of
silver three vnces, the ointment of Populeon, Ceruse washed, Infrigidantis
Galeni; of each half an uncle, oil roset complete an uncle. Mix al together and
bray it well in a mortar, until it be as it were an ointment, which you shall
use until the disease be consolydate and sound.

Against ^omatycke svvellynge.
IF this infirmity be in the leg, take twenty pound of water made with
Ashes, flowers of Camomille, roots of Walwort or Daneworte, of each a
handefull, common Salt half a pound, of the best white Uinaigre four vnces,
mix and sees all together until the half be consumed, than strain it, and
wash the leg with it.

Remedies for the scabs* An ointment very good for to annoynt yonge children
who because of their tenderness, can not endure a purgation.
TAke four vnces of oil roset, a dragme and a half of common Sa^t, an uncle
of fresh Butter washed and so bray and stir al well together, until it
become unto a soft ointment.

Another ointment very good for little children* and old folk, to use before
and after a purgation.
TAke Turpentine washed in Rose water four vnces, of y^ juice of Lemons an
uncle a half, of fresh Butter an uncle, the yelke of one Egg, of common salt
two dragmes* of oil ro^et two vnces, myxe and stir together all a great
while in a mortar, until it become an ointment. With the which by a fire when
he goes to bed annoynte the scabbye part of the body, or ells all the
body: but as thyn as may be.

Another remedy.
TAke the water of Lapatium ^utum, distilled two poud the juice of Plantaine
four vnces, Rose water three vnces, the juice of Lemmons two vnces, Litarge
six vnces, Ceruse half an uncle, quick Brymstone three dragmes, make a very
small powder of that which may be made powder, and mingle it with the said
waters, letting all stand. xxiiii. hours lunge. That done, put all in a
Lymbeck, and distill it with a small fire. This water serves not only for to
heal the common scabbe: but also to make the crusts of old ulcers and scabs
and of the pockes to fall of, to take clean away the cicatrice or scabbe
thereof.

A bayne or bathe for the same.
TAke the leaves of Lapatium acutum, the leaves of ^umitorye, the leaves of
Mallowes with the roots, leaves of Borage of each three handefull, of bran
bound in some cloth two handefull, of rye three handful: sees al this in
sufficient water until the third part be consumed, then strain all, and while
the Patient is annoyntynge let him bath all his body in the same bain in the
break of the day, and without taryinge any lunge time, let him go into his
warm bed, and there let him sleep and sweat.

Against the scurfe or leprie, called in Latin psora.
AFter a purgation, I commend much the anointing at night when he goes to
bed, all the parts of the body infected with this disease, with oil of Tartre
or of Lees of wine, and three vnces of very strong white wyn^.

A remedy against pu^es, bladders, blysters, or wheles and against the small
pockes. An ointment.
TAke an uncle of Peche karnels burned and made into a powder, the juice of
Plantaine and of Syngreene, of each half an uncle, Ceruse or Lead washed a
dragme and a half: make of this a soft ointment as much as shall serve you.

Another remedy well tried.
TAke two dragmes of Camphyre, an uncle of Ceruse washed, half a pound of red
Ci^es, a pound of the inner part of Melons without the pills, ten Swallows
eggs, two dragmes of Pearls, three dragmes of the seeds of Xilon or
Gp^sipium, the tree that bears Cotton, two dragmes of Salt four vnces of
the juice of Lemons, half an uncle of white wine lees: make that in powder that
ought to be, and put al together in ten pound of water of Lapatium acutum
distilled, leaving it so two days and two nights. This done, distillall
together in a Limbecke, with the which water so distilled, the Patient shall
wash his face three or four times a day. It hath been proved very good.

Against the strong cogh of yonge children.
Sees in wine some ^sope and some S^rpellum, or Sauorye, or else steep some
Jeniper berries in wine, and give the child to drink of which you will.

Against the stynkyng svveate.
TO those that so sweat, make a clothe steeped in wine wherein Myrtle leaves
or the herb it self, or else his fruit hath been sodden.

Against the payne of the eyes.
TAke Mallowes, Violets that grow in Lent, topp^ of black berry trees, dried
Roses, Ueruine, Willow or Osier that grows on the ^illes, wash your eyes
with these at night, and make a plaster of the herbs with the yelke of an
Egg, and lay it upon your eyes.

For a white spot in the eyes.
Burn cockle shells of the sea, and Olibanum, as much of the one as of the
other: make them into a powder with cuttle bones burned, and lay that upon your
eyes twyse or thrice a week.

Against the difficulty of bringing forth child, and the retention of the
skin that the child is wrapped in, called in Latin Secundina or Secundae.
TAke the roots of Parslye, and leaves of Leekes, wring the juice out, and
mingle it with a little oil, and give it the woman to drink, putting a little
Uinegre into her Matrice, and she shall incontinently be delivered with gods
help.

A remedy when the foundement comes out.
FIrst wash or bathe very well the foundement (be it either of a man or of a
woman) with the decoction of wine and Worm wodde sodden together, and annoynt
it round about with some restrayntiue ointment. After this straw upon it
Ashes made of Willow and of his roots, and of the finn bones of some fyshe
salted, and put in the foundement again with some linen cloth: and doyng thus
twice or thrice a day, he shall find him self very well.

Against the payne of the guts.
Sees in water some nightshade with ashes, and lay it upon the place where the
pain is. For this also is good raw Sisamum, sodden with his seeds, and laid
upon the painful place.

Against the difficulty in making water, saving for that which comes of
the stone. For Men.
Sees water Crosses, and make thereof Ca^aplasma a plaster, and lay it upon
the place about the privy members, causing ye man to sit in the decoctio of
it.

For Women.
MAke them an vndersmoking thorough a close stool with wild Mint, with Neppe
or Cat mint, and with Pulliole or Pulegium. We make sometime as well for the
man as for the woman, an estewe or bain wherein hath been sodden some Jeniper,
Neppe Pulica^ia, in English flea wort, wild Mynte, Bay leaves, Pulegium,
Wormewod and Tansey, geuinge to Benedicta simplex, is an electuarie, very
medecinable for the gout.
the Patient being in this bayne, Benedietam simplicem. But if the stone be the
cause, then sees in water Saxifrage with the roots of Sanguinaria, or
decoction until half of the water be consumed, the which give unto the
Patient: but if he desire wine, give it him with some of this water in it,
continuynge so four or five days, and twyse or thryse a day. If he peace not
for all this, it is a sign that the stone is thoroughly grown and hardened.
But than if it stick in the bladder, take Mallowes, Crista marina, in English
Sampere, little wild Cabbages, Saxifrage, Pellitorye of the wall, water
Crosses, Ameos, and the seeds of Nettels, sees all this in lycour, whereof
let the third part be wine, the other part oil and the fourth part salt
sea water, bathinge and washinge well with this decoction the parts about his
privy members, and laying upon them the herbs.

Against crabbelyce.
AGainst the Crabbelyce that breed about the privy members and under the
arm pyttes, annoynt those places with ashes laid in oil: but against those
that stick in the eye brows, take an uncle of Aloes, Ceruse, Olibanum, of each
five vnces: make all into powder, and make of it an ointment with lard cut
small as much as shall suffice.

Against a Cankar.
NOte that the leaves of wild Juie sodden in wine, and laid to it are very
good for it.

Against the little worms and itching of the hands or body.
AGainst the itch and worms in what soever part of the body that it be, but
chieflye in the face and forehead, you must steep weate in wine with the
powder of olibanum, and lay it upon the place as it were a plaster.

Against the swelling of the coddes.
TAke Mallows, Wormwoode, Ueruene, bismalua or march Mallows, tansie, and two
cabbedges, sees all this in old strong wine, and bathing and washing them
twice or thrice a day. As for ye herbs, stamp them and sees them in Honey,
laying them upon the coddes with wine.

For to make the worms come out of the hands and feet.
TAke a hot tyle, and some vessel full of water, then put some seeds of
Iusquiamum upon the red whote tyle, holding your hands or feet over the smoke
of it, you shall see the worms fall into the water like little hears. Another
way: Burn Ote straw into ashes, put it into water as hot as you may endure
it, holding your bands and feet in it, and endurynge the heate until it wax
cold: than strain and press it so harde until there remain no moore water,
seperatyng it fair and softly. You shall find the worms as it were little
threades, which the smoke of the Jusquiam hath drawn out. If the place do
itch, and is eaten with worms, burn straw into ashes, and toss it and
mingle it in water as boat as you can endure it: put in your hand or foot
that hath the worms, and they will come out. Than afterward heal the
knawing as you do some other soore.

A remedy for the deafnes of the ears.
TAke the fat or grease of eels new killed that swims upon the decoction
of them, the juice of caprifolium, Barba Iouis* and a handful of Antes or
Pismers eggs, bray and strain all, mixing it and seething it with oil. The
decoction made, put to it some Uinaigre or wine sufficiently, that it may be
the more penitratiue persing: this done, power some of it into the ear that is
not deffe, stopping the other that hath the impediment, and lying upon the good
ear: and beware he go not the next day into the wind: but let him keep his
house, lying all the day lunge sometime on the good ear and sometime on the
ill.

A remedy against fistuleys.
TAke the leaves of red Cabbages, and their seeds, the roots of great r^bra
tinc^orum of each an equal quantity, bray all and sees it well until three
parts be consumed: than strain it, putting to it some honey. And seethinge
it again until it be thick. Whereof you shall give the Patient two spones
full, morning and enenynge.

For the scabs of the hands.
TAke Lapatium acutum, and fumitorie, making thereof as it were an ointment
with hogs or ^wines grease and May Butter, wherewith annoynte your hands.

A water of a great and marvelous effect, for to keep mans body e from many
infirmities and diseases.
TAke fonre pound of distilled Aqua vite, of very good wine, two pound of
salt burned, two pound of quenched Brimstone, four vnces of white Tartre,
four vnces of the wodde of a Filberd tree. iii. vnces of rock salt. Let all
this be brayed, syfted and mixed together, pouring upon the foresaid Aqua
v^te, and putting it in a Limbecke to distill.

What operations come of such distillations.
THe first distillation draws unto it the powers of all the spirits of man,
that no venimons best can approach or come nigh him: with it is kept flesh
and fish as with balm, it heals and cleanses lentils and other spots of
the face: it drives away all manner of scabs from the body, and cleanses
watrynge eyes.

The second drives away impostumes, and other superfluities of the body: it
pulls out and heals lose teeth, and puts, away all swellynge of the
Liver.

The third cleanses all spots and scurfe, it heals stinking of breathe,
and purges all phlegm of the stomach, as meat not digested.

The fourth puts out of the body, all cold and congeled blood.

The fyfte delyuereth the body from the falling syckennesse.

The sixte drives away all languish and infirmity come of the gout.

The seventh puts the gout from the feet.

The eight excells the Balm, which* you should keep well.

The nynth, if you mix with it, and dissolve gold in it, is a preservative
for the liver.

The tenth, if you put a drop of it in any vessel of gold full of wine, a
froth and skumme will swim upon the wine which is very gold in deed, so
that what so ever you touche with it shall be fair gold. Yet you must note
that after every distillation you must stamp and syfte the leese as at the
first time.

Another water or Balsamum almost for the same things.
TAKE a pound of Turpentine thrice distilled, a pound of Aloes thrice also
distilled, a pounder of Amber raw, Mascatum brayed upon a stone in manner of
some liquid ointment, putting to all this a little oil, and so incorporating
it and distilling it nine times. It is a Balm that may well be kept, for it
is so parfite that it abides first all trial of fire water.

Secondly, it will pearce thorough the hand.

Thirdly, in annoyntinge your face it kepeth your youthful colour.

Fourthly, it fastens and consolidateth all incision or cuttinge.

Fiftly, it purges marvelously the eyes.

Sirtly, anointing all the body with it, it is said that it shall never
rot or corrupt, nor ever* breed worms. This hath Hermes the Philosopher
written and confirm it as most true, for as much as I have proved and tried
it.

A powder very good to conserve the sight.
TAke Betony, Rue, Selandine, Saxifrage, Leuistici. Pulegium, Annice, Synamome
Euphrasia, in English eyebright, of each a handful, Grani Paradisi, Ginger,
fennel, persly, Isope, Organny, Osier of y^ mountains of each a dragme,
Galingale an uncle, of Sugre an uncle Make all this into powder, and eat of it
every day with your meat: for the sight is thereby preserved. And if your
sight be perished or half gone, it will heal it and recover it perfectly
again. This powder is found and thus ordained by master Gerarde, which tried
it upon him self: for he having used spectacles the space of twelve years
together, and yet scant could see with them, nor read the greatest letters
that were (so much was his sight perished) after he used this powder but a
whole Lent together, only in this sort as I have told you: he recovered so his
sight again, that all the rest of his life after, he conlde read the smallest
letter that was, very perfectly.

Against the payne of the flanks or the pluresye.
TAke a wild Bores tothe of the upper Jawe, the greatest, and make thereof a
powder, whereof you shall give the Patient to drink with a little broth, and he
shall be cured.

Against quartayne agues.
TAke the grease or fat that is under the manes of borses, and sees it in a
new earth pot: and when you feel the ague come, annoynte the chyne of your
back, you shall be healed in three times so doing.

To heal old wounds and cankers of the legs.
TAke cuttyngs or shearings of shomakers leather, and sees them, and the
grease or fat that you shall get of them, set it by it self: than take of
the herb that grows at the foot or root of Willows the finest that is,
and the moss that looks like Velvet: dry it well and make it into a powder:
and lay of it upon the wound, and with the said grease anoint round about
the wound, and he shall shortly be whole.

Against the scurfe.
TAke Barrowes grease what quantity you will, and sees it with a glassefull
of wine, and half a pound of Bean flower in manner of an ointment: than take
vryne or peace, and heate it as whote as you can endure it, where with you
shall wash your head, and than annoynt it with the said grease, and it shall
be whole within fiftene days.

Against ventositie, colic, or payne of the matrice.
TAke a dragme of entrails made in powder, a dragme of Stecas, give it the
patient to drink in a new laid egg, and she shall be healed.

For the hardness or brawn of the feet.
DYppe your feet in whote peace, when the hardness or braun is mollified, take
a launcet or ^yssours, and lance it round about: and than by and by put some
juice of Syngrene upon it, and the next morrow it will be well.

To make very perfect Vinaigre.
TAke the cromme of a whote lofe new drawn out of the Oven, a glass of
strong Uinaigre, wherein you shall put some Ginger, Pepper, Pyrethrum of Leuant,
Calamus aromaticus, the which things being brayed and stamped together, you
shall put into Uinaigre: Than take the cromme of a whote lofe, and put it so
that it may receive to it all the foresaid things. Than dry the said lofe
in an Oven, and make thereof a powder, and put the said powder in a Hoggeshead
of wine, and it will become very perfect Uinaigre.

Against the falling syckennes.
TAke the Matrice of a Sow, the which being made in powder you shall give to
eat or to drink unto the Patient, and as soon as he hath received it, the
sickennes will remove from the brain, and sprede into his fingers ends,
tormentinge him very soore: but whereas the said matter shall assemble and
^ome together, make a rupture: and the matter will* ^ome out as yellow as
Saffron, and he shall be quickly healed.

For children that be broke.
TAke white Paper, and chawe it well with your teeth, and make thereof a
plaster, as great as will cover al the broke, bind it in a swadle band with a
linen clothe: Than lay it to his coddes, and make fast the swathing band:
but you must renew every day the paper chawed, and he shall be whole.

Against the payne of the Spleen.
TAke of the lunges or lights of a Fore made into powder, and use to give to
the Patient to drink or to eat of in good white wine, he shall be cured.

For to stench blood.
TAke mans blood dried in the Sun, and make it into powder, if it cha^ce that
there be any vain broken or hurt, whereby there comes ^ut abundance of
blood, lay of the said powder upon it, and it shall be stenched.

For to heal in four days the scaldynge with water, or any other thing,
without ointments or Players. It hath been tried and found true.
TAke an Onion and cut him ouerthwarte, and wring out the juice upon the
scalded place, doing so every day twice and it will heal it.

For to stench blood.
TAke a sour Orange, make a whole in y^ top where the flower grew, keep
that upper piece that you shall take of, that you may afterward close up the
whole again: yet before you stop it up, you shall take the suet or grease of
a he Goat, the bigness of a Walnut, and put it into the whole: than set the
Orange upon the coals or embers, that it may incorporate, and dissolve: Than
annoynt along down your back bone, and overthwart the flanks with the same
lycoure, and it shall heal you within three or four times by the grace of god.

Against the worms in little children.
TAke a lamp full of oil Olyue, and lay an iron in the fire, and when it is
red whote quench it in the said oil in the lamp: then annoynt thereof the
nostrils, the throat and the navel, and straight way you shall see a great
miracle.

To heal the Emorrhodes or Piles.
TAke Dogs dung four vnces, half a pound of common oil, put them together
in a new earthen pot and sees them a little: then take out some of the dung,
and bray it upon a trenchour: then sees it again in the said oil, and put
to it three vnces of new wax, to the intent that all may come to incorporate
together: and before you annoynt the Emorrhodes or Pills with the same
ointment, you shall wash them with white wine, and in four days he shall be
whole.

Against all kinds of payne and grief.
TAke a glasseful of the juice of Leucoron, which is our winter Gylofer, or
Violets fastinge, and you shall see a marvelous effect.

Against styfnes or shrynkynge of synowes, called the cramp, or swelling,
coming of the wound taken of some venomous beast, in Latin Spasmus or
Spasma, or conu^lsio.
TAke Hogs dung as much as you will, half a pound of oil roset: sees
all in a new yearthen pot, and lay it as whote as you can endure upon the
soore place, and it will heal it.

For them that can not pysse by reason of certain gravel, and viscositie or
carnosirie, which is abundance of flesh.
TAke the juice of Radish roots, of little Leekes which are found under the
ground, and dry them, and make them into powder: put all together, and give
every morning a certain quantity of it to the Patient to drink, and he
shall be healed in short space.

Against deffenesse.
TAke a quick Eel, and put him on a spit alyne and roast him: take the grease
that comes out of him: Than take a Garlyke head roasted upon the coals
orcenders, and take one cod or husk of the same Garlyke at a time, and put
it into the said grease, and so put it whote into his ear, holding his ear
upward the space of one Credo, and you shall see the fylthie humour come out
of his ear, he shall be healed.

Against opilation or stoppinge.
TAke wild or marsh Mallowes, what quantity you will, and sees them in
runnynge water: than take of it about a glassefull whote with sugre Candye
morning and evening, and you shall be cured.

Against the gyddinesse of the sight.
Give every morning unto a child to eat some sweet Fennel, and let the
same child like the Patients eyes, and he shall be cured.

For them that can not broke their meat, b^t vomit it again.
TAke mint well stamped and the crommes of bread burned in the fire, and
vinaigre: and make thereof as it were a sauce, and sprede it upon some linen
clothe with the powder of Cloves: heate it upon a brick or tyle, and lay it
upon his stomach, and you shall see a goodly experience.

Against the head ache by to much drinking.
TAke Rue leaves, and bray them with Uinaigre, and put Roses to them and
bitter Almondes, and with this rub your head, and you shall be eased.

Against all the payne of the head.
TAke half a dragme of Bay berries, of Scammonia, and of Saffron a dragme,
bray all well together with Uinaigre and Roses. And when your head aketh,
annoynt it where it grieves you with this ointment, you shall se the virtue to
be marvelous great.

Against the pain of the head that continues always.
TAke leaves of black Juye, and bray them, put them with Uinagre, oil and
wine, as much of one as of the other: sees this together, annoynt your
forehead and your temples, and it shall ease you very much by gods Good
grace.

Another way.
IF the patient think that his head eleaueth in sonder by reason of the great
pain: take yuye, and make juice of it, the which you shall mingle with oil
roset: and with a linen clout you shall annoynte fair and softly his
nostrils, his temples, and his forehead. And if the pain be vehement, lay some
of it upon the scull of his head.

Another way.
TAke the brain of a crow, and sees it and than eat it: for there is none
so great a pain of the head, or none so old but that it will heal it with a
singular virtue.

Against the Mygrame happening suddenly.
TAke Bengewine and bray it with Uina^gre, and annoynt your forehead with it,
and your temples and it will mitigate the pain.

Against itchyng of the head.
TAke a sheep gall, and mix it with white chake and therewith rub your
head, and let it dry upon it, and it will heal you.

Against ulcers or scabs of the head as well of men as of women.
TAke the gall of a Bull, and mingle it with Uinaigre, and having made it luke
warm, rub your head with it, and you shall find a marvelous remedy by the
grace of almighty God.

Against old and putrified wounds.
Bray Celandine, and than mix it with old suet, and lay it so upon the
ulcers or scabs, and you shall be healed incontinent God willing.

For to keep that the flesh grow not to much in a wound.
TAke the lights or lunges of a sheep whote, and lay it upon the wound, and
the flesh shall be equal with the skin.

To heal and take away the s^fe.
TAke a handful of Rue, and half an uncle of quick Brimstone, and sees it
with good old wine: and so wash your head with it: but yet your head must
first be washed with luke warm water, as men are wont to do most commonly, and
it shall be cured.

For to kill Lice.
TAke the whaye that remains of cheesemaking, put to it a little Uinaigre, and
drink of it certain days: and al the lice will dye, and there will breed no
more about you.

Against the distillation of the brain, and heaviness of the head.
TAke Beete roots and bray them well, and than take the juice of them and
receive it up into your nostrils. And that will draw unto it all the humour of
the head, and cause it to come out.

Against murres or catarres that begin to grow.
YOu must abstain from supper, and from eating of any herbs, and from salt
and fat things. For the catarre comes of indisgestion of the meat, and by
the rawnes of the stomach. Therefore above al things you ought to astaine
from fat meates. And when you are amended, you may take your supper as before
your sickness you might have done.

For to restrain the murre or catarre.
TAke five parts of wine, and the sixte of honey, mingle all together, and
let it cool, and make of it a gargarisme.

A remedy for that disease when the hear of the beard or head falls of, of
it self.
First you must shave with a rasour the place, and than rub it well with an
onion: that done, take barley parched and made into powder, and mix it with
Bear suet, and so lay it upon the place, and the hear will grow again.

To keep that the hears shall not fall of.
TAke the powder of Walnuts, of heath Cypres burned, of the ashes of a Mule
or Mulets hoof burned, of the oil of Myrtell, the ashes of rats burned, and
their dung made in powder. Also the ashes or fresh dung of a Hedgehog, and
some Sandaracha, in English yelowe* Oker: mix all the said things with
Uinaigre and soft Pitch, and lay it upon your head, it will keep your hear
from falling of.

To make the hears of a man beard or head to grow.
YE shall take y^ which grows sometime in y^ hoxe or pasterne of an Ass, which
is like unto little warts and burn them, and make powder of them, the which you
shall put in old oil, than lay it upon the place. This thing hath such virtue
that if a man annoynte or rub the jaws or chin of a woman, she shall have
the hear grow upon the same place.

For to make hears grow.
YE shall take a Hedgehog, and burn it al to coals, and put the powder or
ashes made fine small, with Bears grease: and lay this ointment over all the
head of a bald man, and it will make his hear grow as fair as ever it was.

For to curl hear a rare secrete.
TAke the ashes of sheep horns burned, and mix it with oil, and rub your
head often times with it: but you must be first polde.

For to make hear black.
TAke Swallows dung, and put it in good Uinaigre in a Uiolle, or some
varnished earthen pot, than bury it in a dung hill, or in horse dung, and
leave it so. xxxv. days full. And than annoynte your head, being polde, with
this medecin in the shadow with a Painters pensille. But before you do thus,
you must annoynt your face with dear suet, to the intent that none of the
colour of the said ointment do spot or black your face. And while this colour
dying doth dry, hold in your mouth some oil, to the end that your teeth
wax not black with it: and the fourth day that you have thus anointed your
head, you must wash it well, and all is done.

To keep that the hears wax not hoar or white.
MYxe the ashes of ground worms burned in oil and rub your Comb with it
when you kembe your head, and your hear shall never change colour in your
old age. It is a secrete that women commonly use.

For to make the hears black.
TAke Cypre leaves brayed, and mixte with Uinaigre: and annoynte your hear
with it, and that same will dye your white hears into black, and in their
place shall grow also black hears.

Against the payne in the eyes.
TAke raw cabbages, and bray them and steep in the said juice of them some
white bread, and annoynt your forehead, and it will take away the pain of
your eyes.

Against the dymnesse or daselyng of the sight.
TAke salt Armoniack buried and well brayed: and mix it with the peace of a
yonge child, and therewith annoynt often times your eyes, and lay of it upon
them, and it will take away the daselyng.

Another way.
TAke the juice of Fennel roots brayed, put to it as much good purified
honey, and sees all with a small fire until it be as thick as honey. Than
put that in a box of brass. And when you have need mix it with conserve
water or woman's milk: and certainly it will put*away the daselyng and dimness
of the sight incontinent, if you lay of it upon your eyes.

Against a web or spot in the eye.
TAke the gall of a white Cock, and bray it with water, and lay it to your
eyes or put some in your eyes, and it will take away the web or spot, and
will consume the drops of blood that are in the eyes, and strengthen the
sight.

For to take away the hurtful hears of the eye brovver.
YOu must pluck of the hears of the eyes diligently which hurt and hinder
the eyes: and than annoynte the place with he Goats blood hot, or Hares
blood, or else of the blood of a Bat or fl^nder mouse, or rub it with
the milk of a Bitch, or with a needle of copper, which being oft heated and
quenched in vinaigre, with the which you shall touche the place, and the hears
will never grow again.

Against all payne of the ears.
YE shall take a seruple of the gall of a Goat, and as much honny, bray all
together, and heate it in a fire pan, putting it into his ear, and stop it
with Wulle, and it will he ale al the pain, yea though there were a canker in
it.

Against the payne of the ears and defnes, and for to purge the apostumes or
corruption of the ears.
MYxe Bengewine and new Goats milk together, and put among them some of an
Ox gall, and oil of Cedar, as much of the one as of the other. Put all this
luke warm into the Patients ears and it will wonderfully appease the pain of
them and comfort the weak hearing, and also the apostumes of the ears.

Against the payne of the ears.
HEate wild Bores pysse upon the fire, and put it into the Patients ear, for
it is a singular remedy. The said pysse may be kept in a violle of glass, or
better in the bladder it self of the Bore.

Against the noise or ryngyng of the ears.
MYxe together the grease of a Goose, with the juice of Saffron, and the juice
of Garlic, or Garlic brayed: Than power it into his ears, and certainly it
will heal him.

Against all infirmity of the ears.
YE shall take ground worms, and sees them with goose grease: and drop of
the same decoction into the pacients ears, and whatsoever payne it be it will
heal it.

Against defnes and hardenes of hearing.
TAke an Ox gall* and the pysse of a he Goat: Mix all together, and put of
it into the deffe ear and incontinent he shall be healed.

Against the payne of the ears, defnes, dirt, or fylthe, worms or water that
is in them.
TAke the juice of onyons, and mingle it with honey, and than drop it into
the ears, and it will clear and heal them.

For to stench bleedyng at the nose.
TAke very strong Uinaigre, and power of it into the ear of that side that
he bleeds, and if he blede of both sides, put Uinaigre into both his ears,
and it shall stench it.

To heal the syckennes called noli me tangere.
TAke the juice of the berbe called Dracunculus, or Ser pentine, put of the
same juice into his nostrils, or dip in a linen cloth, and lay upon the
soore and the next day take it away, for it will bring with it all the roots
of the soore.

Against stinkyng of the mouth.
TAke the root called acorios, or calamus aromaticus, and chawe of it fasting,
as it were Masticke, holding it a good space in your mouth, and it will make
you have a sweet breath and mouth.

Against the toth ache.
TAke the root of Jusquiam, and sees it in Uinaigre, and hold of the
decoction thereof in your mouth, and it shall heal you.

Another way.
TAke ground worms, and sees them in oil, and than bray them well, and put
of the decoction into the ear, on that side that the aching tooth is of, and
the pain will cease.

For to make teeth fall out.
TAke ground worms, and burn them upon a red whote tyle, and than take the
ashes of the said worms so burned, and put it into the hollow and akynge
teeth, and cover them with wax, and they will easily fall out without any payne
at all.

For to make teeth white that be black.
TAke white bread, of a pommyse stone, as much of the one as of the other,
burn all together, and make thereof a powder, wherewith you shall rub your
teeth, and they will be very white.

For them that be hoarce.
YOu must swallow down, three mornings together the yelke of a new lay
egg raw.

To heal the disease called the kings evil.
TAke Barley flower, liquid pitch, wax, and oil of equal quantity, mix
all together, and sees it well, and put into it a little peace of a yonge
^bilde, and sterring it well about, lay it upon the sore in manner and form of
a plaster, and it will heal it.

Howe to know the kings evil.
TAke a ground worm alive, and lay him upon the swelling or sore, and cover
him with a leaf: if it be the kings evil, the worm will change and turn
into earth, if it be not, he will remain whole and found.

Against the cogh, and distillation of the breast, and lunges, and running of
the eyes, payne of the bladder, and when the pipe of it is stopped, which
causes that a man can not pysse but with great difficulty. Also for those
that spyt blood at the mouth, or pysse blood: and for the flyxe, and
colic, and payne or heauynes of the belly and choler: and also against a
vomitynge without an ague. Also against all pain of the body except of the
head: and especially against the vlceration of the lunges, if you give the
Patient an electuarye or two of it.
TAke six dragmes of myrrh, five dragmes of frankincense, four dragmes of
the juice of poppy called opium, six dragmes of Saffron, four dragmes of the
seed of white Jusquiam called Henbane, and four dragmes of the pill or ryne
of the root of black Jusquiam: you shall beat into powder the said bark or
ryne by it self, and sift it fine and small thorough a sarce or syue, and than
grind the Saffron: and than the seed of the white Jusquiam or Henbane, and
than after the Myrrh and the Frankincense. With the which you shall mix the
Juice of the Poppye, having been laid before in water.

And this done, you shall put strayghte way to it a little water, to the intent
you may make thereof Trochiscos or little Balls or Tablettes, of the weight
of half a Dragme. You shall take of it at night with three mouthfuls of water.
This provokes steep, and asswageth all grief, as is aforesaid. If you will
you may make Pylles of it: for it is all one, as concerning the virtue of it.

Against all vehement coghes.
TAke the juice of Leekes brayed, and sees it with oil, and give it to the
Patient to drink, and it shall profit him greatly.

Against the cogh be it never so great.
TAke Brimstone made in powder, as much as you can take up between your three
fingers: Give the same unto the Patient with an Egg half roasted, before
breakfast, five days together, if it be a man, but if it be a child three
mornings. And there is no cogh so vehement, but it will heal it within the
said time God willing.

For one that hath swallowed down a blood Sucker.
TAke Uinaigre wherein there hath been first quenched some red hot iron: and
into the same put some butter, and heate it by little and little, and give it him
to drink, and it will make the blood Sucker come out. It hath been proved.

Against an old and inveterate cogh.
TAke quick Brimstone, and beat it into powder, and wrap it in old Hogs or
Barrowes grease: And than the first day give three Pills thereof un to the
Patient, the second day two, and the third day one. And the said Pills must
be made so that he may swallow them down.

Against the bloody flyxe coming of the artere or synew of the lunges, or of
the liver.
TAke the root of Consyre called Marquerites, wash it in cold water and
scrap it with a knife of Juery or bone. Give unto the patient to drink two
vnces or more of it, and as much as he can eat. But note that he must not
touche any Uinaigre that day, though it have great virtue to staye the
blood, for truly it takes away the effect and virtue of this root, if
you give him any with it.

For to restrain a great and vehement vomitynge.
TAke a little quick Brimstone, and as much of the scraping of a Hearts horne:
all being brayed and made in powder, mingle and temper it in a soft Egg, and
drink it, and it will stop the vomiting.

For them that can not keep their meat in their stomach but vomit it up
again.
YE shall take a little aloes and give it them to drink with cold water, and it
will make them keep their meat in their stomach.

To quench and assuage thrust.
YE shall take water and oil mixed together, and heate it a little and drink,
and vomit it up again by and by. And if need be do so again, and it will
quench your vehement thrust.

Another way.
YE shall take the yelke of a Hen egg half roast mixed with oil, and
swallow it down, and it will take away your thrust.

Another.
YE shall take a stone in a Fountain, and lay it quickly upon your tongue,
and hold it so a while and it will quench your thrust.

To stop the hycket.
TAke a spoon full of Uinaigre made of the Herb Scilla or Squilla, and drink
it, and by and by the hicket will cease, by the grace of almighty God.

For to stop the hycket that commer^ often.
TAke whote water, and put your hands into it, and hold them there a good
while, and the hicket will cease, it hath been proved and found true.

A sovereign remedy for them that have wry necks by reason of shroken synowes:
also for them that have the gout.
TAke the stones of a Beaver, called Castoreum, white Pepper and Perseley of
each equal quantities: bray al together sift them. This done, take a sponefull
of it, and put in so much honey, and two mouth fulles of whote water, and
give it the Patient to drink before breakfast, and he shall be healed.

To take away the smelling under the arm hooles.
TAke very old Bengewine, and make it into powder, and syfte it: and than
rub your arm hooles with it, and they shall smell well.

Against apostumes and swelling at the root of the nailes.
TAke an akorne brayed with soap, and lay that upon it, and they shall be well.

To make a man nails grow incontinent which be fallen of.
TAke the herb that is called Pentaphillon or Quinque^ follium, in English
Cinkfoyle, and bray it with any grease: and lay it upon the place and the
nail will come again incontinent.

Against the disease called Mentagra or Lichen, which is a foul breaking out
or covering al the face with a scabbe and begins at the chynge.
TAke the fresh branches of a fig tree, and sees them in Uinaigre, than
bray them well, with this annoynt the soore, and undoubtedly he shall be cured
and healed immediately.

To take away the seabbe of a running tetter, or ryngworme of the face.
TAke the roots of wild cowcumbers, and sees them unto the third part, then
bray them well and put to them some lytarge of Silver, and some Brimstone in
powder, as much of the one as of the other, and put to it also a little Wax:
and than rub and annoynt the soore place with it, it will heal it.

Against Burgeons and pushes in the face, as well by the heate of the Sun as
otherwise.
TAke the yelke of an Egg and bray it with honey and Ceruse, and so annoynt
your face with it, and it will cure them very well and perfectly.

Against all spots, pimples, pushes, or ulcers in the face.
TAke Masticke, and the herb called lappa mayor, in English clotte or great
bur, soap, wax, old oil, lytarge of Silver, as much of the one as of the
other: mingle al together, and sees it like an ointment, and annoynt the place
with it, it will heal it.

To take away the blackenes of the neck, and spots of the face.
TAke Bean flower and temper it with the Juice of the inner part of Pompons,
and make thereof eight Trochisci or little Balls, which you shall dry in the
shadow. And when you will go to your bayne or bathe, you shall take as much
as you shall think good of the said Balls, which you shall break and mix
with water, and annoynt the blackenesse or spots with it before you enter into
your bath. And when you begin to sweat, then rub the places with it, and
wash them, and the spots will go out. It is proved and found true.

Against the bruising of the face by a fall or slyppe.
TAke the rynde or bark of a Radish root, and bray it well, and mix it
with Honey, and annoynt the place and it will heal you.

Another way very good.
YE shall take new soft cheese made of Goats milk bray it with honey, and
lay it upon the place, and cover it with a clothe, and it will take away the
brusynge immediately by the help of God.

Against wartes and malanders.
YE shall take the herb called in Latin Scorpius, because it hath seeds like
unto a Scorpions tail: bray it well, and put to it a grain of salt, and lay
it upon the wartes, and they will fall of.

Against swellynge of the stomach, pain of the raynes, gravel, fleam,
colic, the emorrhodes or piles: also to staye the flowers of a woman, and
for those that have an infected liver and spleen: also for those that coghe
ordinarily, and for them that have the falling syckennes.
TAke an uncle of the roof of Enula campana, three vnces of Fennel seed, two
vnces of black Pepper. Stamp each of these things by them self, and sift
them very fine. Than put all into honny half sodden, and give the Patient
of it the quantity of a hasell nut with whote water. Some take it with
Oximel, other some with wine, and other take it alone in a spoon, to make them
peace the stone and gravel.

Against the payne of the Spleen.
TAke a dragme of the root of Enula campana, dried and made in powder, and
than sift it fine, and gene it the Patient fastinge with old wine, and this
will cure the Spiene.

Another.
TAke eueumis auquimis made in powder as much as you can take up with your
three fingers, and bray it with wine, and give it the Patient to drink before
breakfast, and it will take away the payne.

For the payne of the loins or haunches.
TAke the root of Iris or gladiolus, and bray it with quick Brimstone and
Bears grease, and lay it upon your loins like a plaster, and you shall
find a sovereign remedy.

Against the swelling or ulcers of the raynes of the back, and kydneyes.
TAke the leaves of dry Roses, the seeds of black Poppye, and the kernelles
or berries of Pyneaple, of equal quantity. Stamp each of these things by it
self, and mingle all together, and take of it the bigness of a walnut, and
put it in two mouth fulles of wine sodden, and three of water, and give it the
Patient to drink, and it will heal him although he pissed blood.

Against the payne of the gravel, and for to make a man pysse.
YOu shall take a little amber stone, of the root of Cyperns, and of black
Pepper, stamp it, and than sees it, and give it to the patient to drink a
spoon full fasting, and it will make him pysse, and aswage the pain of the
gravel.

Against the payne of the raynes.
TAke a pound of wild or marsh Mallowes, fresh sheep dung, the old leaf
of a hog, which is the fat that lies by the back, and the ribs, which
husbands use to roll up and keep to make saulues, of each two pound: Stamp
these things and mingle them together. That done, lay it upon Wulle new
shorn and un washed, and so lay it upon the rains of your back in manner of
a plaster, and it will shortly take away the pain.

Against the gravel.
TAke the roots of asparagus, in English Sperage, of Saxifrage, the root of
clotte or great Burs, the root of Smallage or Alexanders, the root of
Ebulus, in English Walwort or Danewort, three garlyke heads, the leaves of
Willows, and a little persley. Stamp all these things and mingle them
together, and give the Patient to drink of it three mornings with sodden wine,
or with some sweet wine, or wine made sweet with honey, and it will make him
peace the gravel.

Against the payne of the bladder and gravel.
TAke the skin of a Ha^e new ^leane, and put it hear and all in an earthen
pot, or lay it upon a clean tyle, that done put it to the fire, so that you
may make a powder of the same skin, the which powder being sifted, you
shall keep in some clean vessel. And when you shall need it take thereof
three spoon full in your drink: which thing soon appeases the grief of
the bladder, and the the gravel. Nevertheless the remedy would have greater
virtue, if you took the whole Hare alive, and put him in a new earthen pot,
and stop all the hooles with plaster or with clay, so that there come no
air out. Than if you put the said pot into an Oven, and let it burn
with a small fire, and when it is thoroughly burned, make it into a very fine
powder, and sift it finely, and than use it for your purpose. This is very
good for them that have the gravel, and that peace blood, if it be taken with
a little wine.

Against the bloody slyxe, or frettynge torment in the belly.
TAke milk, and quench whote flynte stones in it, o^elles some whote iron,
and that done divers times, give it to drink unto the Patient (prou^ded that
he have not the ague) and he shall be healed.

Against the straynynge, frettynge, and grypyoge of the belly.
TAke seven or nine of the lunge and red berries of a wild rose tree, and let
them be type. Bray them well, and give to the Patient with old wine, if he
have not the ague: but if he have the angue, give them him with water. And if
need be, you shall give them him so three days together, and he shall find it
a sovereign remedy.

For those that have frettyng and gryppyng in the belly, and the laxe.
TAKE the yelke of Eggs raw or ros^e, wild green Reasyns, Galls as much
of the one as of the other in weight: Mire all together in brayinge it, and
give it to the Patient whote and he shall be cured by the grace of God.

Against the colic.
TAke a Hen a live, and see that she eat not in two days: than kyl her, and
take the little skin that is in her breast, or throat bole, and dry it and
make it in powder, the which you shall give the Patient, with some harsh or
gross wine somewhat sharpe. And the Patient must be fasting, and not having
supped the night before, but kept in a good diet.

Against the payne of the colic coming suddenly.
TAke the heel of a Hare, and carry it about you, and the sudden colic
shall never take you.

Again the payne of the guts or bowels.
YOu shall take Bay leaves, and sees them in water, and give the Patient
drink of this decoction and he shall be healed.

For to stop the laxe.
TAke the roots of Hearts horne next to the head, and make a fine powder of it
with a fyle: and of this powder give a dragme unto the Patient with red wine
a gobblet full: and this will stop the laxe if he use it three mornings.

Against the frettyng of the belly or laxe.
YOu shall take one Pomegranade or many, and put them in an earthen pot, the
which you shall stop well and lute about with Potters clay, to the end there
come no air out. This done, set it in an Oven to be burned: than the
Pomegranade being well made into powder, keep it. And when you have any
fretting or griping in your belly, coming suddenly, drink a little of the same
powder with wine, and you shall be soon cured.

For to know a secret or hidden dyseaso of any man and to heal the same.
TAke a yonge whelp that yet sucks, and let him lye night and day with the
man the space of three days, during the which time the patient shall take
milk in his mouth, and spite in to the whelps mouth. Than take the said
whelp and cleave him in pieces, and you shall know the sick part of the man by
that of the dog, which you shall see either infected or whole and sound. For
certainly the whelp draws to him self the secrete and hidden disease
whereof he dies, and the man shall be healed, and you may bury the dog.

For them that void blood at their fondement, and for those that have their
blood broken.
YOu shall take the yonge springes of nettels very tender, bray them well in
a mortar, and take the juice of them, and give it the Patient to drink alone
in the morning, or with some strong Uinaigre and cold water, three days
together, and there is none so corrupt blood but it will purify, nor no laxe
so great but it will stop it.

Against the worms that engender in men's bodies.
YOu shall take the gall of a Bull, and dip some Wulle in it, and lay it
upon the Navel, and it will make the worms come out of the body.

Against the griping of the belly and desire to go to the stool and yet do
nothing.
TAke cow milk sodden, and give the Patient often times drink of it and he
shall be whole.

Against the payne of the colic.
TAke the little bird called in Latyne Vpupa in English a Lapwinge, and burn
her whole with her feathers, and take of the ashes, and give it the Patient to
drink in wine.

Against the ulcers or fystules in the foundement of a man.
TAke Date stones and burn them and than make them into a fine powder, lay
often times of the same upon the fistules or ulcers, or upon the hole of the
foundement, and he shall be whole.

For to heal the emorrodes, or those that lose their blood.
TAke Leekes and bray them well, and take the juice of them, the which you
shall give the Patient to drink before breakfast, and the Emorrodes will soon
cease by the grace of God.

Against the ulcers of the foundement, and against the disease called commonly
saint Fiacres syckennes.
TAke the pysse or ryne of a Pomegranade, break it and sees it in good wine,
than bray it well, and lay it upon the soore place like a plaster, and it will
without fail heal the disease.

For to ripe or break an apostume or swellynge in the gryne.
TAke nas^urtium, and bray it with pitch, and lay it upon the swelling or
apostume, and he shall be whole.

Another.
TAke vnslekt lyme, two garlic heads, the yelkes of three eggs, mingle al
together, and lay it upon the sore place like a plaster: this will put away all
the payne and swelling of the apostume.

Against hurt or flawing of the skyn by chasing and going either of the feet
or between the thighs.
TAke a mortar of lead, and a pestle of the same, and put in the said mortar
some oil roset, and the yelke of an egg: the which things you shall grind
until they become thick: and till some of the lead be mingled with the said
ointment. And when it is thick like a plaster, sprede it upon a fine soft
linen cloth, and lay it upon the pain, and continue thus three days until
the pain be whole.

Against the swelling and payne of the soles of the feet.
TAke the Moss that grows in the water, but let it be green, bray it well
with oil olyue, and lay it upon the place with a linen clothe, and it will
cease the payne, and take away the swelling.

To make wartes fall of.
WHen you kill a Hog, let him that hath the wartes receive the blood even
whote upon the place where the warts be, and as soon as it is dry let him wash
it of. And if it be a woman that hath these wartes, she must take the blood
of a sow, and she shall be healed of them.

For to take away the felons and cats hears, which break out with wheales in
the fyngers, and also knoppes growing in the feet.
TAke ground worms, stamp them and with a little oil lay them upon the
soores, and they will bring them away, and heal them.

For to assuage the payne of the gout quickly, and for all grief of the
feet.
YOu shall take ground Worms, and put them in Uinaigre, that they may purge
them selves of all the ordure and fylthe. The next morning wipe them dry,
and put nyne vnces of them in a pound of grease, brayinge them a good while,
to the intent you may incorporate them: and there with annoynt your feet, and
the payne shall ease.

Another way.
TAke a Fore and sees him well, than strain the decoction of him thorough a
linen clothe, wherewith you shall bathe and wash often times your feet, and
it will take away the pain.

For to get out any thing that sticks in a mans body as thorns and such
other.
TAke a piece of a Sponge or Wulle dipped in peace and lay it upon the thing
that sticks in the flesh, and it will come out without pain. Or else take
some lard, and sees it in it own grease, and than lay it upon the soore
place and bind it, and it will draw out all thing that sticks in the
flesh.

Here follows certain receiptes against the Plague.
A composition preservative against the pestilence, excellent as it were
Tryacle or Mythridatum.
TAKE Pympynell dried an uncle and a half, Sordij very, roots of Gentian,
Imperatoriae, Zeduariae, of each six dragmes, Calamint, apiastrum or
citraginis, enula campana roots, tormentillae, which is a kind of cinkfoyle,
Bay berries, the seed of card^s benedictus, which is one of the kinds of the
herb called atractilis an Orange or Citron, oxalidis, which is a kind of
Sorrel, Bole armenicke prepared of each three dragmes, lykoryse scraped
Glyeanisi seminis, ye sedes of Scariol^ which is intibus satiua of the kinds
of Endiue and Succorye, Cynamomi exquisiti, of each two dragmes, Gylloflowers,
red Roses, Coriander prepared, the seed of Basil, Corticis citrij sicci,
Santali lutei vel rubri, Agollochi, that is Xilaloe, vel ligni aloes, the
scraping of Juorie, red Coral, Pearls of each a dragme and a half: Saffron
two scruples. All these being beaten very small, mingle them with Sugre of
equal quantity, or else with Oxymelite or syrupo aceta^o or oxysacchara* or
rather the Syrope of Lymons: But unto weak stomachs contrary let it be made
like to a liquid con^ection, either opiatae vel massae, or else let there be an
electuarie per tabellas of a dragme weight, or four scruples, if you add unto
every uncle of Sugre a dragme of the said powder. You shall take of it two or
three hours before your meals. If it be powder, the quantity shall be a dragme
or half a dragme at the least, with some convenient lycour of those which are
now named: If it be opiatae, the quantity of a Chestnut or Walnutte. If it be
in form of a mass and thick you shall make two or three Pylles or mo very
soft for to take at one time, drinking after it some such lycour as I have
already spoken of. When it is in little tablettes, you may take one or two.

Another composition in powder on in another manner for the same.
TAke y^ roots of angelica, Gentian, Zedoaria, of y^ rotes of tormentilla, ye
seeds of oxalidis citrij mah; Synamome elect, which a kind of cassia, of
yellow or red Sandale or Sandars, cardu^s benedictus, of each two dragmes the
pill of an Orange, a dragme and a half: the scraping of Juorie a dragme,
red Coral half a dragme, of the best Sugre like weight, put to all these
things as the powder shall seem pleasant good. Or if you will seek another
way as is spoken of the first preservative. As concerning y^ quantity of this
copos^tio at every time, the time of using it, let it be as the other before.
But if you will have the both, let them not be of like sort, but the one in
powder or in tablettes, the other in opiate or mass with pills.

Common pylles very good for the same.
TAke aloes probatae lotae two vnces, of Saffron an uncle, of good Myrrh as
much, or else Myrrh and ammoniacum dissolved in white wine, of each half an
uncle, mix them with honny rosef. And in winter you may put to it Zedoaria,
Agallochi or red Sanders of each a dragme. But in summer take away the Myrrh
and ammoniacum, and put to it bole armenicke prepared three dragmes, red Coral
half a dragme, Camphyre half a scruple. You shall commonly take a pill or
twain before your meals. Sometime you shall proceed unto a dragme after your
first sleep.

Antidotes or medecines preseruatiues and comfortable, of small cost, easy to
find and prepare for poor folk.
1. TAke Garlic, and drink a little wine after it: or a fig with a Walnut,
and Rue and a little

2. salt specially in winter.

3. Take twenty leaves of Rue with two Walnuts and as many figs, and a
grain of salt, al being mixed together receive it in the morning.

4. Take six leaves of Rue with Uinaigre.

5. Take the root of the herb called in Latin Imperatoria of some Laserpitium
gallicum in English Pelli^orie of Spain.

6. Take the root of angelica.

7. The root of Gentian.

8. The root of Zedoaria.

9. Of carduus benedictus.

10. Of carlina.

11. Take the herb called Scordium, of the one, of the two, or of ^o, in small
powder the quantity of a Dragme, either in a soft mass made with sodden
Honny and Uinaigre, or with some handsome Syrop, as of Lemons, or in opiate,
the bygnesse of a Chestenutte or of a Cyche peas with Wine in Winter, in
Summer with Rose water, or with the Juice of Sorrel.

12. Take Sorrel alone, or with Pimpernell tempered in Uinaigre, and drink of
it in the morning.

13. Or the Juice of them, where with you may make a tos^e in Summer.

14. Or Jenyper berries; green Pimpernell leaves, of Betonye, of Pule^ion, of
Sorrel as much of the one as of the other, brayed together, sodden with
sodden Honey, and a little Uinaigre like a conserne.

Another medecin.
15. Take Jenyper berries, Bole armenicke of each two Dragmes, or of equal
weight. Being stamped let it be laid in sweet oil and Uinaigre, or in
Oximilite, in a mean form, either opiate or mass. If it be opiate, take as
much of it as a Chestnutte. If it be mass take one great pill and drink
after it a little Hydromel or Oxymel, or wine.

The things of favour or sweet smell, as powder, balls, waters, parfumes,
and first a powder for many purposes.
TAke Iris florentiana four vnces, of Maioram in Latyne samsuehum, red
Roses, Cloves, of each an uncle, Melissophilli, Nucis odorate or muscate,
Zedoaria, Cynamome, Agallochi, yellow Sanders, Masticke, Storax calamita,
Bengewine, of each half an uncle, calami odorati, spicae nardi radicis, of each
a Dragme: Juncus odoratus two scruples.

Make of these a powder to smell, to be beaten and broken in some piece of
sylke or fine linen clothe. Beat also these things grossely for to parfume
and to wash your head and beard: or else let them lye a certain time in white
wine and rose water, and afterward strain them. And keep that which shall be
strained for to use when you will, or let them be stilled in some double
vessel, that there may be aqua aromatica. As I said it is for to parfume your
chamber morning and evening, being laid upon coals, or this powder to give a
good odour keeping it about you or in some place between your garments and
linen, or to make a little bag of it, or to mix it with some lycour meet
for to wash your head and beard, or otherwise to weate your handkercher in
it, or some piece of sponge to swell to or to make distilled water of it, for
to smell to.

A parfume.
TAke coals of Will was eyghte vnces, Ladani pu^i, two vnces, Frankincense of
the male kind of the wodde and berries of Juniper of each an uncle, Agallochi
or Xilaloes, Bengewine, Storar calamita, of each half an uncle, Nutmegs,
yellow Sanders, of each three dragmes, Cloves, Storax liquida, of each two
dragmes, Zedoaria, calamus aromaticus, of each a Dragme, gomme tracaganthae,
dissolved in rose water sufficiently. And make little parfumes of what fashion
it pleases you.

A smelling balle.
TAke pure Labdanum, two vnces, Bengewine an uncle and an half, the coals of
Willows an uncle Storax calamita sire dragmes: Iris florentiana, half an uncle,
Cloves three dragmes: Maioram, yellow or red sanders of each two dragmes: red
roses calamus aromaticus of each two scruples, Leuige^tur. Than take the ^yl^
of sweet Almondes, Bengewine of each sire dragmes Storar calaminta half an
uncle. Let these things sees together with sire dragmes of Rose water.

Than strain it, and let that which is strained be made soft with two vnces
of white Wax, and Storax liquida a dragme. Make it like a ce^eatum or plaster
with the which the other things must be stamped and incorporated with a whote
pestell. Put to it a dragme and a half of Musk, or else two scruples.

Another sweet balle meeter for the Summer.
TAke red roses and Violets, of each three vnces and a half, the berries and
leaves of Myrtle if you can get them, coals of Willow, of each an uncle:
Jenyper berries, the Pills of Orenges, of each sire dragmes, yellow or red
Sanders two dragmes: Bengewine a dragme, Camphyer two scruples. Make hereof a
powder. Than take oil of Roses an uncle and a half, Storax calamita, Bengewine
of each two dragmes: an uncle of rose water, or as much as shall suffice. Make
that soft that is strained with two vnces of white Wax. Make a ceratum, and
beat all the rest together with a whote Pestell. Put to it a little Musk five
or six grains.

Outward remedies to purge the air, the easyest, the presentest, and those
that are of the smallest price for men of small hability.
PArfume some Jenyper berries of the root cloven a sunder and dried, and of
the other drogges before mentioned for the first out ward remedy.

2. Uinaigre alone, or mixte with Rose water, for to sprinkle your chamber.

3. For to hold oftentimes in your mouth, and chaw, namelye when you go out and
keep company with men, there also the Pill and seed of a Citron, which
gives a good odour: Cinamome, Cloves, the roots of angelica or Zedoaria, and
such like, as are before mentioned.

4. For to smell with a Sponge, or with a Handkercher day and night, Malmsey,
or other strong wine and sweet, as Muscadell alone, or else with rose water,
wherein there hath been tempered some aromaticall drogge already spoken of, as
Cloves or nutmegs.

5. Or good Uinaigre twyse as much as of cold water with a little Camphyre,
specially in Summer.

A powder against the worms.
TAke Coriander prepared five dragmes, Jenyper berries three Dragmes,
Sothernwodde, Hearts horne, corallinae, of each two dragmes: white Agaricke
new made in balls: Nutmegge, Cynamome elect, of each two scruples, make of
this a meetly fine powder.

The whole sum of the regiment and governing of a man self.
1. IT is necessary that you be kept nete and clean, and all things in your
house, flying diligently and as much as you can all evil air.

2. Avoid al excess and superfluity, specially in drinking and eating, and
from women.

3. Also from travail, and from excess in sleeping and watching.

4. Beware of moist meates and corruptible, and of all things that is cause of
rawnes, and other evil humours.

5. Live soberly, drink and eat at ordinary hours, and in good order.

6. Take your rest, and use some neat and good exercise or occupation.

7. Maintain and keep your natural or accustomed voiding.

8. Be merry.

A sovereign powder against the venom of the plague for rich men and for
princes.
TAke Saphyre, Hyacinthe, Smaragdus, of one of these, or two, or of all, one
Dragme: of Pearls, Bole armenicke of the best, the seeds of Oxalis, of each
two Dragmes: of the scraping of ^uorie two scruples, of Unicorns horne a
scruple, of the seeds of Ocimum half a scruple, yellow or red sanders:
Agallochi or Xilaloes of the best. Doronici, Cynamom exquisite, saffron, of
each three grains, Musk six grains. Make hereof a fine powder. You may
leave out the Musk for them that love it not.

The use of the said powder and for other that follow shall be declared
afterward.

A powder for poor folk, of no less efficacy and strength than the second.
TAke bole armenicke of the best two dragmes: the seed of Oxalis three
dragmes, aloes hepaticum lotum red Coral of each a Dragme, the powder of
Diamargariti frigidi two scruples: the powder of Diatrio santalon eight
scruples, the pylles of dry Orenges, Cloves, Cynamome, Saffron, of each five
Dragmes. Make thereof a fine Powder. You shall use the said Pouders with
Conserves, or without them, with Syroppes, distilled waters, or rather with
Juyces, and other such convenient lycours

A drink for poor folk, and in a places, where there is none or very little
Juice, either of Syrope, cytrons, Lemons or Pomegranades.
YOu shall take the powder prescribed for poor folk conditi rosati, or
conserve of Roses, conditi boraginis, or rather coraginis, of each a Dragme and
a half: of the suck of Oxalis two vnces Succi arantij. Succi coraginis
extract with Rose water: of good white Uinaigre of each an uncle, and make
thereof a drink.

A drink often times tried, profytable, and wholesome, the which as many men
say, was never found vain.
TAke powder of Motherworte, of the first, or of the second two dragmes: the
seeds of Sancti or of Orenges: of Myrrh, of each a dragme: the scrapinges of
Hearts horne a dragme, mix them together well beaten. You must drink this
with white Uinaigre before a fire: and as soon as there appears any
swellynge in the gryne or flank, or vnderneth the arm hooles, or any where
else, the remedy must be ready: for it provokes great sweat whereby the
venom or infection anoydeth in every part.

The Patient thus sweating his infected sweat beside a fire, must be rubbed
and dried with whote linen clothes, which must be always changed, until the
savour of the sweat begone with rubbing.

Of the said pouders also a man may make conserves or opites after this manner
that follows.

Opiate.
TAke of the first or second powder, Orange pills conserved, of each an uncle
and a half. conditi rosati, that is to say, the conserve of Roses, the
conserve of Buglosse of each two vnces, of the syrope of the juice of Citrons
or Lemons or Orenges, or else of Oxalis or omphacini, as much as shall suffice.
Make thereof a liquid electuarie in form of an opiate. Whereof take an uncle or
more, drink after it some of the foresaid lycours, and such as here follow.
It shall be well done, to mingle an uncle of Purcelane with the licours as
follows.

A drink meet after every taking of the said opiate, or to be mixte with the
takynges of the same opiate, for the strongest or meanest men, according to
the place and time.
TAke the Juice of Citrons or Lemons three vnces; of the wine of sour Orenges
of white Rose water, of each an uncle. And mix them together.

A drink for poor folk.
TAke the Juice of Sorrel very clear three vnces, of bitter or sour Orenges,
good white clear Uinagre, rose water, of each an uncle. Make thereof a drink,
putting to it a little Sugre if you will.

A drink to cause one to sweat.
TAke good triacle or Mythridatum a dragme, bolearmenick of the best, or of the
powder of one of the herbs called cardiacae, before described half a dragme:
Scabiose water two vnces: water of Oxalis, Buglosse or Borage of each an uncle:
and make thereof a drink.

Another drink easy for poor folk.
TAke the decoction of Scabiose, and of the flowers of red Poppye a
glassefull with a little Sugre.

Or a Ptysane made with Barley and An^e seed and the roots of Persley. Or of
the decoction of Cyche peason, the roots of Persley, the roots of Succorye:
the one or the other decoction with sharpe Syrop two vnces, or with Sugre and a
little white Uinaigre.

These drinks must be taken whote, the Patient being well covered in his
bed. The Triacle and Mythridate, although they be of great efficacy in this
behalf, yet they are not meet for women with child, nor for yonge children.
The use also of them ought not to be often, nor in great quantity, when the
fever is great. Some men advise is to mingle the medecin for sweating with
some distilled water, or with the decoction of herbs, concerning the part to
the which the venomous matter hath his course. Now if a man know that the
matter goes to the head, they will that the patient take it for to sweat with
some distilled water, or with the decoction of Betony: but if it go to the
vital parts or to the breast and hart, with the water or decoction of Borage,
which is very Buglosse. If it go to the belly and bowels, with lycour of
Wormewodde. If to the liver, then with the decoction, or water of Agrimonie,
which is the true cupatorium.

An epitheme or medecin to lay the region of the heart to cool it.
TAke Rose water four vnces: water of Uiolettes and of Nempher of each three
vnces: water of Buglosse, of Oxalis, of wine of pomegranads of good Uinaigre,
of each two vnces: of Coriander prepared three dragmes, red Roses, flower of
Pearls of each a Dragme: of red Sanders half a dragme: of both Corals,
of Camphyre, of each a scruple: Saffron half a scruple, myngle them together.
And make thereof an Epitheme.

An Epitheme for the Heart good for poor folks, which may also serve for
the Liver.
IT is made of twelve vnces or a pound of Rose water, of three vnces of good
white Uinaigre, putting to it in Summer white and red Sanders, of each a
dragme. If it be in Winter, in stead of Sanders you shall put to it Cloves, the
flowers of Nardus celtica, or of Lauendar of each a dragme.

An Epitheme or medecin for the Liver.
TAke the water of Succorye in Latin ambubeia, Rose water, of Oxalis of each
four vnces: white Uinaigre: wine of Pomegranades of each two vnces: powder of
Diarhodon abbatis two dragmes: the powder Diamargariton frigidum, which is a
confection made with Pearls, one dragme: red Sanders half a dragme:
Camphier half a scruple. Make thereof an Epitheme.

Local medecines, and first a plaster or ointment, for to draw and dissolve.
TAKE the roots of Narcissus, or of Flowerdeluce with his oil, and bray it
with Honny. It is good for a delicate body, and eases all the payne.

Another easy drawing medecin.
TAke Rue or Dogon brayed with Triacle, or Triacle alone, or of a Radish root
cut into little round pieces, and lay on one after another, and change it
often times.

Another very good in manner of a plaster.
TAke Diachylum, two vnces, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of each half an uncle and put
them together.

Medecines of the kinds that burn the skin or flesh called medicamenta
caustica, or vesicatoria, whereof the first is very strong.
APlaister of Cantarides, and of vnsleckt lyme mixed with oil of Walnuts in
steed of a lancet, for to get out the swellynge.

Another plaster.
TAKE the roots of Narc isse or of Lilies sodden with ashes, of Pigeons dung
of each equal parts: of melligo anacardina called mel anacardinum as much as
shall suffice. And make thereof a plaster.

Another stronger.
TAke fermentum acris, sour Leven, Soap, Figs, old Walnuts, of each half
an uncle, iris florentinae mustard seed, vnsleckt lyme, Calcanthum, that is to
say romain Uitriol, beaten together of each two dragmes: as much Turpentine
as is needful. Make of it a plaster.

A medecin that cleanses and purifieth.
THe yelke of an Egg mixte with a little Barley flower or wheat flower,
putting to it honey roset. It is very sweet mete for a delicate body.

Another of the same very good.
TAke the Juice of Garlyke six vnces: the Juice of Wormewodde, good Honny of
each three vnces: Barley flower or Wheat flower, or flower Darnel or
Bearebarley two or three dragmes. Sees it until it be some what thick, and
make of it an ointment that mundifieth or purges the soore.

A plaster incarnatyfe.
TAke the leaves of Pimpernell, of Betaine, Ueruin, semperuiui tertij, commonly
called Vermicularis of the less Centorie, of each a handefull and a half:
sees it in white wine unto the half. And being strained put to it Rosen,
Wax, sheep suet, of each three vnces. Sees all together with a little woman's
milk put in it, until the Juyces be consumed. Than when you have taken it
from the fire, put to it when it begins to be cold, Rosen, Turpentine,
three vnces, clear Masticke and proved ten dragmes, aloes hepaticum two
dragmes: mingle them and stir them with a pors^cke, and make of it a
plaster.

A repercussyfe and resolutyue oyntmente against the Canker.
TAke Lead burned and washed; Pompholix which the Apoticaries do cal Nil,
Frankincense, of each two vnces, Wormewodde, of that which is called absinthium
ponticum half an uncle, oil of Roses three vnces, Wax six dragmes: the juice
of nightshade, as much as is sufficient for the thickenesse of the ointment.

A plaster dyapompholigos of Theodoricke, for to stop the gnawyng and eating
of the canker. It is repercusfiue, refrigeratiue and desiccatiue.
TAke good oil of Roses, white Wax, of each two vnces: the juice of the red
grains or berries of the herb called Solanum two vnces: red Lead washed an
uncle: Lead burned and washed, Pompho lygos commonly called Tutia, of each half
an uncle: frankincense of the male kind two dragmes. Make thereof a plaster.

An ointment very sweet for cankers that have corrupt matter in them, which
also alayeth the payne of those that have no corrupt matter in them.
TAke good Wax, Turpentine, Bulls suet, the new fresh marow of a Dear or
Calfe, oleum rici ^ium, new and fresh Goose grease, Honny elect,
Frankincense, Diphrix, Pomphilix, of each equal porcions, and of oesipum thryse
as much, without y^ Frankincense the author thinks it will be sweeter, but
with it more resolutyue and will ripe it the sooner, and is better for Cankers
that have no corrupt matter in them.

An ointment of a marvelous virtue against the eating and running of the
canker, and to take away al the grief of the same.
TAke Kue or Sumach sextarios three. Pills of Cypress three vnces, Galls not
ripe, Cassia of each an uncle a half: Vinu adrianum, that is to say: wine that
binds, and old wine of good odour five sextarios. All these things being
bruised together, lay them in wine three days, and then sees them three or
four wawmes styring it with a slyse of Cypres. Then having wrong all out
diligently, and caste away the thycke of it, the Juice will sees in the
thyckennesse of Honey, for to be kept afterward in a vessel of Glass.

This ointment must be used alone without any mixture aganyst the said
disease, adding to it sometime a little wine. If the medecin be to thycke you
must make it liquid and soft, for the syckennesse which possesses the
privy parts of a woman, that is to say, the neck of the Matrice. If you
dissolve it in the milk of an Ass, it mitigateth the pain, also is very
profitable for al other scorching of y^ skin that runs in length,
extends more and more, and brings no inflammation. It is good for to dry up
the ears that have been of lunge time subject to a runnynge and putrified
matter of blood corrupted.

Also for the Gaumes that be infected and withered, also against ulcers that
be harde to heal, and can not be cut, but with great payne, if it be
mingled moderately and reasonably. But howe is it that soft and gentle
remedies should resist such a disease, to the which the roughest and the
most wyldestgeue place. The said ointment is to be prepared as follows.

Take Sumach a pound: Pylies of Cypress three vnces: of vnrype Galls, of
Cassia, of each an uncle. Vi^um adrianum, that is to say: Vinum astringens,
four pound.

A plaster mitigatiue, and very gentle for Cankers, specially of the breasts
or paps.
TAke Saffron, Poppye, Frankincense of the male kind of each a dragme:
Lithargyri, Plumbi vsti loti two dragmes, Ceruse prepared and uncle and a half:
white Wax two vnces, Goose grease, new and fresh butter of each three vnces.
Rosacei boni four vnces. The powder being brayed with the Juice of Morella
must be mingled with the things molten.

FINIS.
Here after follow many goodly receyptes, touching the handelynge of divers
metalles, all well tried and approved.
And first for to harden iron.
TAKE Ueruine, and bray it stalks and all, and keep the ^uyce of it in some
glass. Now when you will harden any iron, put to the same suyce as much of
peace, with the juice of a little worm called in Latyne Spondilis, in Dutche
Engherlincker. And let not your iron be to whote, but when you see that it is
indifferent whote, quench it in the said mixion, and let it cool of it self
until you see sytle spots upon it somewhat yellow* and than put it to the
said water. If it wax very blew, it is a sign that it is not hardened
enough.

For to harden knydes, and other such ^yke.
TAke the marowe of a Horse, wherein you shall cool your Iron.

For to harden a fyle or other instrument of iron.
TAke old shoes and burn them, and make them into a powder, and put to it as
much salt: cast this mixture upon and under the Files in a Cof^r or Chest of
iron covered with a cover of iron: and lay the powder so that it may be as
much above as under, the thickenes of a straw. Cover the said coser with his
cover, and put it into y^ fire until it be red whote: after this let it fall
into some cold water, you shall have the Files good and very hard. You may
annoynt them also with oil of Lyne or he Goats blood*

To harden any other substance material.
TAke the juice of Cynkefoyle, with the juice of Wormewodde, and put it in some
Glass, than take worms which you shall stamp, and strain thorough a linen
clothe, and rub the whote iron with all, and than quench it in the said
iuyces.

To make any instrument of steel harde and sharpe.
TAKE the leaves and roots of Buglosse sodden in water, wherein you shall
quench your instrument of iron.

Another.
TAke Dragontion with his roots, and as much Ueruine: sees this in clear
water, and let it cool, and ware clear, and so annoynte your instrument
with it. Also take man pysse mixte with clear water, made luke warm: in
this quench your instrument. Also you may harden it in good Mustard made with
strong Uinaigre. Also when you will harden any thing you must see that it be
clean neat and polished.

For to keep it from ^leanyng when it is a hardenyng.
TAke Tallo we and melt it, than power it in cold water until it wax thick
and swim in the water the thickness of a fyngar. Than take your instrument
whote, and put it first thorough the Tallow and then into the water. Some quench
also shurtes of maile in the juice of Rape roots.

To make iron or steel soft.
IF you will make iron or steel as soft as copper, take vnsleckt lyme with as
much Alume, well stamped first in some mortar: mix well these two things
together, and lay them upon some lynnen clothe the thickness of a finger or
half a finger, and wrap your instrument that you will have made soft in it,
and lay it so in some small fire the space of an hour, until the fire go out,
and that your instrument be cold of it self, and than shall you find it as
soft as copper.

Another.
Lay your iron or Steel in a small fire, and when the fire is out, let your
iron cool of it self.

Another.
TAke the water of Radish roots and quench your iron or steel in it. Also
you may take the ashes mixte with vnfleckte lyme, and make thereof lye, the
which you shall let run thorough the said substances: in this lye steep
your iron or steel the space of a night, and so shall you make it meet to
cut or engrave in. Afterward if you will harden it again you may quench it
in cold water.

Another.
TAke the yellow flowers like to Marygoldes, the leaves be large and as broad
as the nail of a mans finger: take them stawkes and all, stamp them, and
strain them thorough a linen clothe, and keep the juice in a pot. Than put
your iron or steel in the fire until it be red whote, and then quench it
in the said water, and it will be as soft as copper.

Another.
TAke some great snails, and other great ground worms of equal portion, and
the third part salt. Than take an earthen pot, or some other platter of
earth full of holes, wherein you: shall powder or salt your snails and worms,
and receive the salt which shall melt and drop from them into another pot
set vnderneth, and the thickest substance will remain in the vessel full of
holes, the which you may cast away. This done lay a stone upon the pot, and
sees it until it some or froth no more: then take it from the fire, and let
it cool. In this water you may quench your iron or steel being red whote,
and by this means you shall make it as soft as copper, and for to harden it
again, you must make it red whote, and quench it in cold water.

Another.
TAke the herb called Foal foot, and distill it: then make your iron red
whote, and quench it in the same water. Also take snails and stamp them with
good Uinaigre, wherein you may quench your iron or steel: Or quench iron in
the blood of an Eel, and it will be like wife soft.

Also take iron or steel, and wrap it in Potters clay with a we ate linen
cloth, and lay it in the fire, and afterward let it cool of it self. Take
also the juice of Marubium, and the juice of Milfoyle, with the juice of
Radish roots mixed with good wine, and quench your iron in the mixtion.

To make Crystal soft so that you may break it in pieces.
TAke burned lead and Crystal as much of the one as of the other, and break
it upon a stone, than put this mixture into a melting pot, and melt it, and so
shall you make it into what form or fashio you will. The same may you break
and bruise as you will.

Another.
TAke quick lyme and ashes of equal quantity, and lye with it, passing and
strainyng it thorough the ashes and lyme nyne or ten times. That done steep
your steel or Crystal in the same lye, the space of* xxiiii. hours, ^nd you
shall find it soft.

For to soften iron.
TAke the water that is upon the blood of a man when he is let blood, which
you shall handsomely power from the blood. Than lay your iron in the fire until
it be whote, than with a little feather wet in the said water rub it so long with
it until the water vanish away, and it will be soft.

Another.
TAke scommed honny, the new peace of a he goat, alome, borace, oil olive and
salt: mingle all well together, and quench your iron in the mixtion.

To soften a little that which is to harde.
THat which is to hard, keep it so lunge in the fire till it be very whote:
Than take Tallow, with the which you shall rub your matter, and let it so
cool.

To mollify and soften iron or steel, in such sort that you may bow and wind
it which way you will.
TAke Camomille flowers with one part of herb Robert, and one part of
Ueruine: put all this in a pot with whote water, and so stop it that no
smoke may come out: than sees it, and quench your iron in it.

To soder all things, and first iron.
TAke an uncle of salt Armoniacke, an uncle of common salt, an uncle of Tartre
calcined, an uncle of belle metal, three vnces of Antimonium: stamp well all
together and sift or bolt it: this done put all in a linen cloth, and wrap
it round about with potters clay well prepared the thickenesse of a finger
and let it ware very dry: than put it between two pot shards upon a small
fire, and let it heate by little and little. Afterward make the fire greater,
until your whole mass become red and melt together: than let it so cool, and
after make it into a powder.

And when you will soder any thing, lay the two peeches that you will soder
upon a table, as ne'er the one to the other as you can, but you must lay some
paper under the pieces.

This done, cast of the said powder between the joints, and a little upon them:
than make some crust of potters, but yet so that it be open above: after this
put some Borace in whote wine until it be al consumed, than with a little
feather rub the said powder, and incontinent it will begin to boyle and
sees: and when you see it boyle no more, it is a sign that the sodering and
consolidation is made. And if there be any excrescence or rising up, you must
diminish it by rubbinge it, for it will not be fyled.

To soder any whote thing.
TAke gomme water, chawke made in powder, and make thereof a dow or paste,
wherewith you shall anoint the thing that is a sonder, laying it upon a table as
is before said: than take away the dow or paste that is upon the ioyninge of
the two pieces, and leave it on both sides: than annoynte the joint with Soap,
and hold a whote cole over it, and by and by the said substance will melt.
After this take away the said dow or past and it done.

To soder copper.
TAke balfe an uncle of copper, three quarters of an uncle of white Arsenick: melt
the copper, and divide your Arsenick in two parts, and caste one part into the
copper molten, mingle al together, than cast into it also the other part: and
than power it upon a stone, and beat it small.

To soder iron.
FYle well to purpose and proporcion the joints of the irons, and than lay
them in the fire, as is before said, casting upon it some Uenise glass, and it
will be sodered.

A powder that will make all metal pliable and soft.
TAke a quarterne of Antimonium, axinigia vitri, and salt of equal quantity:
Make all together in a powder: than take of the same powder three parts, and
one part of the metal and melt it.

Another upon brass.
TAke salt stamped, Tartre, Saltpetre, axinigia vetri, ashes of Vines, or Lies
of wine, quick lyme: Make al this in powder, and lay it upon the place that
you will soder.

For to grave in iron or steel, kny^es and harness.
TAke one part of coals made of bir^he stamped, two pactes of Uitrsoll, with as
much salt armoniack: Than stamp all together with Uinaigre, until it be like
unto a soft dow or past. Now when you will grave in iron or other things, make
first the description or figures that you will grave, and that with Vermilion
mixed with oil of Line, and let it dried, and afterward cover it with the said
substance the thickenesse of a finger, the which the whoter it is laid upon
it, the sooner it will be done, but you must take heed you burn it not. And
when it is weldrie, take away the said powder, and wash well the graving. Also
some take two parts of Spanish green, or one part of common salt, and in
stamping it in some mortar, they put to it some strong Uinaigre, and than do
it as is aforesaid. Take also Uitrioll, Alom, Salt, Uinaigre, coals of
Birche, and do as before.

To grave with water.
TAke Spanish green called Uerdet, quick Silver, Sublime, Uitrioll, and
Alome of each equally, stamp well all together, and put it in a glass, leaving
it so half a day, stirring it often times: Than make your description or
figures as you will, with Wax or artificial O^re and Oil of Lyne mixed
together, or Vermillion mixed with Oil of Lyne, than annoynte it with that
water, and let it alone so the space of a day: But if you will have your
description very deep graved, leave it so standing longer.

But if you will engrave writings or Images, you shall make a ground of Wa^e,
wherein you shall make your description with the point of a Bodken even to
the bottom: Than power the water upon it which water will engrave it. Or
else you may lay upon your description made as before is said, some
Marcurium sublimatum, and than caste some good Uinaigre upon it, and let it
alone so half an hour.

Another stronger and moore bytyng.
TAke a quarter of an uncle of Spanish grieve, alumen plumae, salt Armoniacke,
Tartre, common Salt, of each a quarter of an uncle, all being well stamped and
mixte with strong Uinaigre, leave it so the space of an hour. And if you will
that your description be high or ra^sed up, write it with artificial O^re
and Oil of Line* brayed and mingled together: and let it ^r^e well: Than heate
the said water in a pan leaded within, letting it alone upon the fire. Than
take your steel and hold it over the said pan, upon the which you shall
power of the said water with a spoon, and so the water will fall again into the
pan and there shall be nothing lost* Do thus t^e space of a quarter of an
hour, but let not the water be t^ whote, lest that the Oil which was mixed
with the Uernishe go not out.

This done, rub over the said substances with ashes or quick Lime, and
than shall you find that which before was anointed, whole and high, and the
other engraned.

To make a colour of gold or siluet to lave upon metal* and to make also a
ground of gold or silver, upon iron* belles, or stones, which shall not go of
with water.
TAke one part of Ocre, the second part of minium, the fourth part of Bole
armenicke, and as much Aqua^ire, and bray well altogether with Oil of Line
^ede* and put t^ it also the bigness of a little nut ^f ^ and* iii* or. iiii*
drops of Uernishe. If the colour be to thick, ^nt a little more of the said
oil to it: Than strain it th^r^ we a fine linen clothe into some clean
bessel, and it will be as thick as honny and than rub what you will with it,
and let it dry, and than lay your gold or silver. upon it.

A colour of gold to set upon brass or copper.
TAke a little pot well leaded, and put into it three vnces of oil of
lineseede, than take half an uncle of Masticke, and half an uncle of aloes
hepaticum ritrinum, and make it well into a powder, and put it into the said
oil, and cover it close with another pot wherein you shall make a little hole
above, that is to say in the bottom of the said pot that shall be uppermost.
Annoynt the said pot well with potters earth and let them be so close one
upon another, that nothing may come out: than put in above a stick broad at
the end, with the which you may stir it: and let all sees as they do
Painters varnish. This done polish well that which you will gilt, and lay
the said colour upon it, and dry it in the Sun, and if there be not enough,
put more on until it be well.

Another.
TAke dry Uernishe, Amber, Alome, of these two as much of the one as of the
other: than take Uernishe, and oil of lineseede: sees all together on a fire
of coals in a pot well leaded, that it may be well mirt together: then assay
it upon a knife, and if it be to thick, put more oil to it: but if it be to
clear or to thin put more Alome to it.

Another.
TAke half an uncle of aloe hepaticum citrinum, half an uncle of Amber, these
two being made in powder set them on a moderate fire. in a pot well leaded,
but let it not be to whote at the first. And when all is molten, power some
boiling oil upon it, stirring and mixing it well together with alitlle stick:
after this let it cool, strain it thorough a linen cloth.

Another.
TAke half an uncle of bole Armenick, half an uncle of white gomme, and set it
upon a fire of coals, putting to it an uncle of oil of Line seed, and when
you may draw it in length like a thread, it is made.

A colour of gold upon brass.
TAke oil of Lyne seed well clarified on the fire: than put to it Amber, and
aloe hepaticum citrinum, of each alike, and being well stamped, mingle it so well
with the oil on the fire that it may be thycke, then take it from the fire,
and set it on the ground well covered the space of three days: And the brass
that you shall gilt, shall take the colour of gold.

To make copper of a silver colour.
TAke wine leese, alome and salt: bray well altogyther upon a stone: and put
unto it a leaf or two of silver, brayeng them also with the other foresaid
things. Put all in a pot well leaded, putting to it some water: then cast your
copper into it, and after rub it with a rubber: and so shall you see when it
is enough.

To gylte iron or steel.
TAke one part of wine cheese, half as much of salt Armoniacke, and as much
spanish grene, and a little salt: Sees all in white wine and anoint your iron
or steel, with it when you have well polished it: and so let it dry, and then
gilt it with gold ground.

To make a water for to gilt upon iron or steel.
TAke an uncle of the ashes of wine leese burned, an uncle of white wine, an uncle
of Alom, half an uncle of salt gemma, alumen plu^ the weight of two grotes,
Spanish green the weight of two grotes, Coperous y^ weight of a groat, bay
salt, a pint of ruening: sees this unto the half, and than put it in a new
pot* laying upon it. vii. or. viii. new paper leaves, and a tile over that, to
the end it may take no air.

To keep all manner of iron, or steel clean, and also all manner of
instruments of war.
TAke Lead fyled very small, and put it in a pot with oil Olyue, until it
cover it, leaving it so nine days together: Than anoint with the same oil,
harness, swords, iron or steel, and it shall never rust. The grease of
neates feet sodden is also good for the same.

THE second Book containyng the manner howe to take out quickly with water or
Lye, without hurtinge any thing, all manner of spots of garments of clothe,
velvet, silk, or other, whether they be spots of oil, grease, wine, or
what so ever they be.
To bring a cloth that was stained to his colour again.
TAKE a pound of earthen pots bruised, and having powered upon it about four
pintes of water, let it rest a night. Than power out the Lie, and put into the
same two Ox galls, a handful of dry birchen leaves, and let them sees
together half an hour long, or until the leaves go to the bottom. Than let
it cool, and such colour as you will restore that was stained, take the
shearings or flocks of the clothe of the same colour, and sees it again with
the said Lie, leaving it so to rest the space of xiiii. days or more: for
the Lie will draw unto it self the colour of the shearings or flocks. Than
power it out, and wash the clothe with it, and it shall receive his first
colour again.

To take spots out of cloth.
TAke cold Lie made of the ashes of Beach, and put to it a little wine Lies,
and of the old clay of some oven, put the clothe into it where the spot is,
for it will take al the spot out, than wash your cloth with clean water, and
dry it in the Sun. And if the spots be not well taken out do it again as
before.

Another way.
TAke six vnces of alumen fecis, four vnces of raw tartre, two vnces of
alome, half a dragme of camphyre, half a dragme of Dragons blood: stamp them
well, and mingle them well together. Than take six vnces of an Ox gall, three
pyntes of clear water, put all together in a kettle; and sees it until it be
diminished of the two third parts, than strain it thorough a linen clothe,
and though the gall nor the camphyre were not in it, yet the water wold be
strong enough: when you will occupy it, bath the piece of new cloth in the
said water, and rub well the spot withal: and when the cloth is no more
weate with rubbing, weate it again, and rub the cloth with it until the spot
be out. This done, take whole water, and wash the place where the spot was:
but if the cloth be white take a little Soap with the same water, and distille
it, and occupy it as before.

Another way.
TAke six Ox galls, and twyse as much rain water, half a pound of Tartre,
an uncle of Alom, stamp them small, and take a glasseful of Uinaigre, into the
which you shall put six dragmes of Uitrioll well brayed, power al together, and
sees it until it be diminished of the two third parts, and than use it as is
before said.

A water to take spots out of white clothe.
TAke four vnces of alumen fecis, a pint of water, and sees them until they
be consumed to the. iiii. part. Than take white Soap and cut it small, an uncle
of Alome: put al into the water, let it stand the space of two days, use it
for your white cloth as before.

To take spots of grease or oil out of white cloth.
TAke whaye of wylke sodden with flower, steep your clothe in it so far as to
the spot, the space of a night: than wash it with fair river water, and hang
it in the most heate of the Sun: but if the cloth be of a noble colour, you
my not let it be to whote lest the Sun hurt the colour: for the heate of the
Sun soon hurts fair colours.

To take spots of grease and oil out of all sorts of cloth white or other.
TAke the water that peas hath been sodden in, and steep your cloth where the
spot is in it, and than wash it with clean river water, and hang it in the
Sun.

Another.
TAke cold Lie, lies of white wine made a little whote, and mix them well
together. But you must take heed they be not to whote and wash your cloth as
before.

To take spots of wine out of all manner of cloth.
TAke Lie made we ashes of beech, white wine lees as much of the one as the
other, lay your cloth in it a night, and wash it afterward with cold water,
and dry it in the Sun.

To take all manner of spots out of sylke.
TAke the juice of great and round musherom^ of a sharpe taste, weate the spots
in it the space of two hours, and than wash them with clear water, and let
them dry.

To take all spots out of crymsen Velvet.
TAke the ashes made of Vine twigs, and make therewith good Lie, whereof you
shall take but a pint, and put into it half an uncle of alumen fecis, and let
it stand a little while, and than strain it.

This done, take a dragme of Alome, half a dragme of Spanish Soap, and half a
dragme of soft Soap a quarter of a bragme of common salt, and a quarter of salt
Armoniacke, half a quarter of the juice of Celandine, a quarter of the gall
of a Ealfe. Put al together and strain it thorough a linen clothe. And when you
will occupy of the said water, take flocks* or shearings of Scarlate, and a
little Brasyl small; sees all that a little in the said water, and than strained
^ thorough a linen cloth* and you shall have a fai^ water* which will take the
spots out of any like crymsen colour. And what colour soever your clothe be
that hath the spots, the same colour flocks or shearinges must you take. Not
withstanding if it be not red, you must leave out your Brasyll.

A water to take al spots out of cloth of gold and velvet.
TAke raw red Arsnicke, martem crudum, as much of the one as of the other,
and when they be well brayed* power some fair water upon them, and putting
the herb Cinkfoyle to it, sees it unto half: and than let it cool, and set
it in the S^e two hours: than wash your clothe in it, and let it dry in the
Sun.

To make a soap that takes out all spots.
TAke a pound of roche Alome, beat it into powder: the roots of Iris of
Florence made in powder, half a pound of new laid eggs, two pound and a
half of Spanish Soap, bray the said pouders with the Eggs and Soap, and make
thereof round balls. If one Egg be not enough, take as many as you shall think
good. And when you will take out any spot of grease, wash the place of the
spot on both sides of the cloth with fair water, than rub it with the said
balls and cloth upon cloth. This done, wash out the odure with clean water,
and wring the cloth to make the grease or filth come out the better. Than wash
it still with clean water, and it will be clean.

To take spots of black yncke or other things out of woollen or lynnen
cloth.
TAKE green Lemons or green Orenges with their pills, the which the Italians
cal pomid, adam or which of the two you will: take but the liquid moisture
which you shall take out by pressing it, wherewith you shall rub well the spots,
and than let them dry. This done* take luke warm water, and wash the said
spots, and let them dry again. And if you see that at the first time the
spots be not well enough taken out, do it once again, and the cloth will
return to his colour again.

To take spots out of Scarlate or Velvet of colours, without hurting any thing
at all the colour.
TAke the juice of Saponaria, called of the Apoticaries condi si or ^auaria*
the which you shall lay upon y^ spot leaving it so an hour lunge, if it be in
Summer, and four hours if it be in ^ter: Than take luke warm water and wash
the spot with it, if it scour not clean, put more juice upon it, or else of
the said moisture of the orenges or Lemons: but if it be Scarlate not died in
grain, lay upon half Soap, and half juice: and than wash it with whote
water, and the spot will go out.

To take spots of oil of from parchement or white paper.
TAke sheep bones and burn them, and make them into powder: and rub the
spot on both sides with the same powder, and lay it so between two bourdes in
a press the space of a night and the spot shall away.

THE third Book, for to dye thread, yarn, or linen clothe, teaching howe
to make the dying colours, and also to dye bones and horns, and to make them
soft, unto what form and fashion a man will.
To dye thread, yarn, or lynnen cloth into a sad browne.
TAKE a pound of bastard Saffron, the which you shall put into a little bag
and hang it in river water a day and a night. Than wash it so much, that it
give no more yellow colour: this done, make a rank of Saffron in a pot not to
thick, than a few of Saffron, and a few of ashes, and cover it well, and let
it stand seven or eight hours: than take eight pots of water, four pots
of Uinaigre, and putting the Saffron with the ashes in a long bag and sharpe
pointed at the end: strain xv. or. xvi. times the said water and Uinaigre
thorough it whote. And this is the last dying or colour.

Than take again as much water and Uinaigre, and strain it thorough, and this
shall be the second dying. Do the like ye third time, it shall be the third dying.
This colour you shall heate, and lay your thread or linen clothe in it the
space of a night, than bang it up without wringing or rubbing it. Do in like
manner with the second colour and with the third, but let it lye in it that
seven hours long.

To dye thread or linen clothe blew.
TAke the berries of Ebulus, very ripe, and well dried in the Sun, lay them
in Uinaigre. xii. hours than rub them with your hand, and strain them
thorough a linen clothe, putting to them some Uerdet bruised Alome alone. If the
blew ve to clear put more Uerdet to it, and lay your thread or linen
clothe in it.

A blew colour to dye all things.
TAke an uncle of the beating of copper, a dragme of salt three spones full of
Uinaigre. Put all together in a laddel of copper: or some other strong vessel
of copper: and when you will dye, put the said matter into the whote decoction
of Brasyll, and die with it what you will.

Another way to dye blew.
TAke three parts of ashes of lees burned, one part of vnsleket syine, and
make thereof lye, let it clarify and than strain it thorough a course linen
cloth take. (...). pots of the same water, power it upon a pound of Flaunders
blew, such as is taken of the diers ^awdrons, mingle them well together with a
stick. Than set it on the fire until you can scant endure your hand in it.
But before you dye any thing, you must have your linen cloth boiled in Alome
and dried again, and plunged afterward in the whote Lye twyse or thryse,
according as you will have the colour dark or clear. The substance must be
whote before you occupy it.

To dye red.
TAke half an uncle of Brasyll scraped, half an uncle of Vermillion well brayed.
Boyle them together in rain water, and put into it the bigness of a nut of
Alome. Sees all unto the half, and dye with it. You may sees also the
Brasylle twyse or thrice putting to it at each time a little Vermillion. Also
you may make of it as many dyings colours as you will.

Another way.
TAke vnsleckt lyme, and put a little water upon it, and let it stand a night,
and afterward strain the clearest thorough a linen cloth, and for every pint
of water put in half an uncle of scraped Brasyl. Let it sees unto the half,
and put to it half an uncle of Alome, set it upon wodde, and let it heate but
not sees. When you will, have that you will die ready prepared in such sort as
here follows. Take lees of red wine and put it in a bag* that al the wine
dreane out, and the lees wax dry. Make thereof balls as big as a hens
egg drying them in the Sun, and burning them after into ashes, and of this
ashes make a strong Lye, and make it very whote, and than weate in it the
thing that you will dye, drying it afterward, and than dye it with the
foresaid colour.

To dye red.
TAKE for every pound of clothe a quarterne of Alome, and sees it, and put
the clothe in it two hours long. Than* take the roset of Brasyl with gomme
Arabic, and let them sees a quarter of an hour. Than strain it, and put
into it your thread, clothe or any thing that you will.

To make fair roset.
TAke a pottle of water, an uncle of brasil: sees them unto the half, than
take them from the fire, and put as much grain to them as you shall think
good, and half a quarter of gomme. If you will have but a sleyght red, power
it into another pot, or put to it a quarterne of Alome in powder, and let it so
stand a night.

To dye wodde, bones, and horne, into green.
TAke two parts of Spanish green, a third part of salt Armoniacke bray them
well together, and put them in Uinaigre. And put into it the thing that you
will die, covering it well, and so let it stand until it be green enough. But
before you die any thing, you must lay it half a day in Alome water, and than
dry it well again.

Another green.
PUt your horne, or wodde, or that you will die, in a varnished pot, and put to
it strong Uinaigre, mingling with if some Uerdegrease that is very thick and
not clear. Cover it well, and set it seven days together in a dunghill, and if
than it be not green enough, let it stand there longer. A man may do the
like with Spanish green or Uerdet.

To die horne, bone, and wodde, into red.
TAke quick lyme, and cast some rain water upon it, and let so stand a
night: the next morning, strain the clearest thorough a lynnen clothe, putting
to it for every pot of water, half an uncle of the scrapinges of Brasil, and ^
them sees well in it: but yet they must be boiled in Alome first, as before
is said.

To die yellow.
TAke the bark of an apple tree, not the outward harde and rough bark, but
the inward, but it in small loppins, and power some water upon them, and than
put in your wodde, bone, or horne, to it with Alome. And let it sees well
together.

To dye black.
TAke Galls broken or bruised in pieces, and sees them in strong Uinaigre:
and put your wodde, bone, or horne in it. And let all sees well together. Take
them than out, and put them in whytes of Eggs, putting to it the juice of
walnuts, and let them sees well together.

To make horne so^e.
TAke man pysse, that hath vene kept stopped, a month together, put into it a
pound of vnsleckt lyme, and half so much of ashes of burned wine Lees, four
vnces of Tartre, and as much salt. Mingle al well together, and let it sees
well, and than strain it twice or thrice thorough a clothe. This done, keep the
said Lie well covered: And when you will soften any borne, let it lye eyghte
days in it, and the horne will be soft that you may cut it, and dress it
after what sort you will.

Or else make a Lie of the ashes of the heads and stalks of Poppye, and in
the same Lie sees your horns and other things.

To mollifye or soften horne; so that you shall imprynte or make any figures in
it.
TAKE a pound of the ashes wherewith Glasses be made, a pound of quick Lyme,
and a pot of water, let them sees so lunge until the two third parts be
consumed.

Than put a feather into it, and pluck it out again, and pill it between
your fingers: for if the feather do pill, it is a sign that it is sodden
enough. But if it pill not, let it sees moore: and when it is sodden enough
let it clarify, and power it out. Take than the fylinges of horne, lay them
therein two days together: Than annoynt your hands with oil, and work the
horne well between your hands as it were dow or paste; and than press him
into what form or fashion you will.

Another way.
TAke the juice of white Marrubium, and of Alexanders, and of Milfoyle, the
juice of Radish roots, the juice of Celandine, and strong Uinaigre. Mire all
together, and put your horne into it well covered seven days together in a
donghyll. And than knede it and work it as you did before.

To cast horns in a mould like lead.
TAke ashes of wine lees burned, and vnsleckt lyme, and make thereof a strong
Lye, and put into it the fylinges or scrapings of horne, and let them sees well
together, and they will be as it were pap, and put into it such colour as
you will have it of, and than cast it into what mold you will.

To make clear stones of Amber.
Sees Turpentine, in a pan leaded, with a little Cotto, stirring it until it
be as thick as paste: than power it into what you will, and set it in the Sun
eight days, and it will be clear and harde enough. You may make of this little
balls, ha^es for knyues, and many other things.

Another.
TAke the yelkes of sixtene eggs, and beat them well with a spoon: than take
two vnces of gomme Axabicke, an uncle of the gomme of Cherry trees: make those
gommes into powder, and mix them with the yelkes of the eggs, let the gommes
well melt, and power them into a pot well leaded. This done set them sire days
in the Sun, and they will become harde, and shyne like glass, and when you
rub them, they will take up a straw unto them, as other Amber stones do.

To polish and to a gloss or lustre unto precious, stones.
TAke powder of Antimonium, and disparse it abroad upon a table of lead that is
very even and smothe. Polish upon this table your stone, and it shall keep
and maintain him in his lustre and gloss.

To make a stone that shall give give fire and burn of it self if you weate
it with your finger.
TAke the Lode stone that hath virtue to draw iron to him on the one side, and
to put it away on the other side. Put it in a pot leaded, and put to it four
pound of Pitch, and a pound of Brimstone, lute and clay will your pot, and
set it in a Forneyse, giving it a small fire the space of a day and a night
augmenting the fire the second day and the third day more, until the stone
be on fire.

After you have made this stone on fire, and have in this manner burned it, as
is before said, you shall let it cool again, and your stone is prepared and
made to give fire when you will.

To mollify or soften crystal and precious stones so that you may cut them
like cheese, and that being put in a mold they shall be harde again.
TAk^ in Auguste the blood of a Goose, and the blood of a he Goat, and let it
dry until it be very harde: And when you mollify and soften Christali or
precious stones, take of the said bloods as much of the one as of the other,
and make it into powder: and than power some Lie made with the ashes of burned
Lies of Wine, and let them be intermingled together in a pot, putting to them a
dish full of strong Uynaigre. And when you will soften your stone cast it in the
same, and heate it a little and the stone will be soft so that you may cut and
fashion of what sort you will: caste him afterward in cold water, and he will be
as harde with in an hour as ever he was: And than give him his gloss and
lustre as before is said of the other.

To counterfey^e perles which shall be very fair* and as they were natural and
^rewe.
TAke in Summer the shells of white Muskles, and scraye them clean with a
knife: take likewise one part of Snail shells, of the cleanest you can
find: and when you have washed them well, stamp them together in a mortar of
stone, as fine as you can, and wash them clean in the Sun upon a linen
cloth, and then put them into a new clean pot, the which ^ot you shall lute
and clay round about with ^utom sapientiae. And being dried in the Sun,
put it into a Forneyse, or Kille of Lyme, and let it burn there as lunge as
men are wont to let Lyme burn.

Than take it out, and you shall find it turned into powder as white as Snow.
This done, take the yelkes of Eggs made clean and broken a sunder with a
Spoon: Myngle the powder with the yelke of the Eggs in some clean vessel:
Than wash your hands clean, and fashion your Pearls of what bigness you
will, persyng them with a Hogs brystell while they be whote. This done, set
them in some clean thing in the Sun, and the whoter the better: yet take
heed there come no rain to them: and than polyshe them in red Wine, and let
them dry again, and you shall have fair Pearls.

THE fourth Book* teaching diverse ways of giltyng, syluerynge, and diynge
Copper, Iron, and other Metalles: Likewise to form, melt, and to make certain
colours.
To prepare Mercury, and so to harden it that you may make it liquid, and
work it.
THE Emperor Frederick made many Images of this substance following, which
seemed to be of Silver, as at Uienna and Nieustadt in Austriche, this invention
was found out by master William and master Martyne his Alchemistes. To do
this you must melt Saturne, that is to say, lead, power it in a round melting
pot while it is whote. Press into it little round stones, that you may
haue^lytle round holes in it, upon the which holes you shall lay a lynnen
clothe, and power some Mercury upon it as much as you will, setting it so in
whote embers until the Mercury be harde.

And when it is harde enough, break it in little pieces, and caste them into
strong Uinaigre, and sees them in it a quarter of an hour. Or else take the
juice of the herb called Longdebeffe, with a little Uinaigre and oil, and
sees in it some pieces of your Mercury broken as before, and by this means it
shall be mortified very well, otherwise it would revive again. This done, take
two vnces of salt Armoniack, half a pot of Uinaigre, and power it with your
Mercury sodden in a pot leaded, and luting and stopping it very well, let it
stand. viii. or. x. days: for by this means the Uinaigre takes away al the
redness of the Mercury. This done, put your Mercury in a pot well luted and set
it in a Forneyse until it be well burned, augmenting by little and little the
fire, that it may keep the fire long in a like temperate heate, until it make
certain choppes or cliftes, and than it is a sign that is enough. Than put
the Mercury in a pot, in the bottom whereof there must be some Brimstone:
stop well the pot, and set it in whote embers or ashes, or upon a fire of
coals, that it may heate by little and little, and that the Mercury may
receive the smoke of the Brimstone. Do so once a day. xxx. days together, and
than take out the Mercury, for it is harde enough to beat and caste. Take of
this Mercury five vnces, and ten vnces of Uenus, that is to say Copper, melt
them together, and it shall seem at all trials, that it is true Silver.

A substance made of paper or other things, to express or set out any
manner of figure that you will, upon white iron. c.
Lay your paper or parchement ouerthwarte the white iron, than weate it on the
out side, and let it dry again, than take it of, and you shall see the print
of it upon the white iron.

To gylte well.
Sees your Silver in Tartre, make it very clean rubbing it with brushes, and
put it into the Tartre again: than take two parts, one part of salt
Armoniacke, one part of Uerdet or Spanish green, two parts of the beating of
Copper: stamp all this small and sift it, and put it into the Tartre with the
Silver, it will get a red colour, upon the which you shall gylte.

Howe to bray gold for to gylte with.
TAke a dragme of fine gold, beat it well, and put to it two dragmes of
Mercury mixed together: than set a melting pot on the fire, and when it is
glowing whote, put the gold with the silver into it, and when the Mercury
shall be in part vanished away in vapour, power it into a dish, wherein there
is a little water, and wash it out, it shall be ground brayed.

To gilt Copper.
MAke a bottom or ground of quicksiluer upon the copper, than give it one
gylde over with ground or brayed gold, than set it on the coals, and when it
smoketh take it away, and part or disparse it with the brush of copper wire,
and than set it again on the fire until it be liquid and soft, or melt, or
dry, and when it has been so lunge upon the fire that it hath gotten a red
colour, take it of, and make it clean with your brush of copper wire, and
than burnyshe it, and it is done.

To gylte iron.
YOu must boyle your iron in Uinaigre, Salt, and Uitriol, and if the iron be
great, annoynt the iron about with it, being whote, until it make it rise,
than lay on your grynded gold, as before.

To take of the gold from silver that i^ gylte, so that the silver shall
remain whole and sound.
PUt about your gilded silver some Brimstone, than take natural Mercury in a
Goldsmiths meltynge pot, or other vessel according as it ought to be, and
heate it, and put your gilt silver into it, the Mercury will draw the ground
unto him, than rub your silver with a brush over the Mercurye wherein the
gold is, than heate your silver, and boyle it again in the water of Tartre,
and it will be clean.

When you will take your Gold out of the Mercury, put it in a little bag of
leather, binding it and stopping it above, as men do Mercury, without over a
basin, and that which remains in the leather, put it again in a meltynge
pot upon the fire, and let the Mercurye vanish in a vapour, and go away in
the smoke. Than take that which remains, and power it in a melting pot, and
you shall find your gold.

To seperate Silver from Copper, be it money or otherwise.
TAke half an uncle of Uerdet or Spanish green, an uncle of white Uitrioll, as
much of Brimstone, half an uncle of Alome: sees al these things with a glass
full or as much as you will of strong Uinaigre; and put your silver into it.
Your silver will remain whole in the glass, wherein you sod it, and the
Copper consumes in the moist humour.

A powder which being laid upon any thing syluered will take of the silver
from it.
TAKE a pound of ^yne lees, a pound of Arsnicke* a pound of common Salt, a
pound of quycke Lyme: ^ire these together, with the yelke* of Eggs, and put
them in a pot, which you shall set in a Forney se to sublyme, and when it
shall smoke some what yellow it is enough.

To convert and turn copper into brass.
TAKE Copper what quantity you will, and the third part as much of Lapis
calaminaris, made in powder, and put them together in a melting pot, let them
melt together the space of an hour upon the fire, and then power them out.

To melt all metal perfytly.
WHEN the metal is molten: you shall put the fourth part of auxungia vitri
beside it, and it will melt perfectly.

For to give a colour of Gold upon Copper.
TAKE half an vnee of Copper, a Dragme of Tutia alexandrina, two parts of
Dates, two parts of Figs, Grapes of a wild Vine black, of the bygnesse* of
three Hasell Nuts, Musk the bygnesse of a Hasell Nut. Stamp all the said
things together, and make it like Paste, and beat your Copper very thin,
and than cut it in pieces.

This done, make one row of the said mixion, and a little Tutia upon it, and
than your Copper upon that, than some of the said mixtion, than again of
Tutia, and than of Copper, always bed upon bed: This done, lute or clay
up the Croset or meltynge pot that they are in, and set it on the fire,
lettynge all the said things melt, and than power them out, and it will be
like Gold.

Some take also Tartre, Bean flower, Tutia, as much of the one as of the
other, steep them well in Uinaigre, and than dry them, and lay them bed upon
bed, for every uncle of copper an uncle of the said powder, and it will take
colour as is before said.

To make Verdet or Spanish green.
TAke Brass or fyled Copper, sprinckle it with old peace and salt Armoniack:
lay the Copper upon a board in the Sun, and when it is dry, sprynkle it
again until it wax green. Thus is Uerdet made. Take Copper beaten like a
plate, make it clean, and bray some atramentum upon a stone with pysse, and
annoynt the copper plate on every side, and let it dry in the Sun: than put
it in a pot leaded and set it on the coals, and let it heate the space of two
hours, and sometime open the pot above, and when you see black smoke come out
of it, take the pot from the fire, and let it cool, and open the pot for to
take out the copper plate, rubbing it into powder between your hands, and that
which will not yet turn to powder: do it again in all things as you did
before, until it may be made into powder: than wash it with whote water or
pysse in a basin, and let it stand styll, for the copper will go to the bottom,
and the atramentu will swim above: than power it out and dry the copper in
the Sun. This done, take of the said powder a pound, of Tartre calcined two
vnces, beat them together with childes peace, and let them dry. Than put them
in your pot, and burn them as before with a great fire until you see a
green smoke come out of it: and than let it cool again, open your pot and
you shall find it fair and green.

To make a white colour of lead.
TAke lead as much as you will, scrape it clean on both sides and cut it into
plates three finger broad, and a handful lunge or more, making a hole at the
end of each of them, hang them on a corde, and take a pail of oak or a pot of
three handfuls long that hath a clean cover: Than hang your plates of lead
round about the pot within side, power into it two pots of good Uinaigre, and a
hand full of salt, stirring them together vpothe fire until they be ready to
sees, than cover the pot well that nothing breath out, and set it in a warm
place, leaving it there. x. days together: than open it, and take out the
plates of lead, and you shall find at each side of the plates a white colour of
a finger thick, take it of with a knife, and put it in a clean glass. This
done, hang your plates of lead again in the pot, as before, covering them
well as is said, and setting it in a warm place, and at the. x. day take of
the white colour with a knife as before, and hang them again in the pot until
you have gotten white colour enough. Than bray all well together in a mortar
putting to it a little water the space of half an hour, until it be thick
like gruell. Than put the said powder in a pot or twain: and set it in the
Sun, and let it dry and harden, and than shall you have your white colour of
lead. But you must note that you must always hang the plates of lead in the
pot again at every time as long as they will continue, and if the Uinaigre
diminish, you must renew it again.

To make Lutum sapientiae.
LVtum sapientiae is a mortar or clay for to lute or plaster the Limbecks or
pots that are set on the fire, because they shall not break or cleave. To make
this Lutum sapientiae. Take the best Potters earth you can find, put in a
dish or platter of earth, or in some other vessel, and power upon it Wine
mixte with horse dung, casting away the longest hears of the dung, mingle it
fyner all together until it be as thick as paste, wherewith you may paste
any thing: not withstanding put in it always good Salt for keeping it from
cleauynge.

To lute or dawbe pots with a lynnen cloth that will not burn.
PUt your linen cloth in Salt water, and let it dry of it self, than weate
it in yelkes of Eggs well beaten, and when you will lute or plaster any pot
with it, give it one touche upon it very thin with the fore said Lutum
sapientiae.

For to soder glasses.
TAke minium, and half as much of quick Lyme, and the meal or flower that
hangs on the mill sides or walls, and the yelke of an Egg, in all this let
a linen cloth be weate and holden before the fire that it may be clammie
meet to cleave or stycks fast, and so lay it fair and softly upon the broken
place of the glass.

Another lutum sapientiae.
TAke Potters earth very clean two parts, horse dong one part, a little powder
of a Brick, and the fylyng of iron, and a plaster of quick lyme: and mingle
it with salt water, and the yelke of eggs: and make thereof a paste for to
lute or clay pots withal. Or else take dry earth, and stamp it small, and
sift, it cast upon it some wheat flower rank upon rank, and than the
yelkes of Eggs and Uinaigre, and mingle all together. Than plaster or lute
glasses pots or limbeckes with it, and dry them in the shadow, and they will
never fail nor break in the fire. You may also mingle it with Ox blood in
stead of water, it is also good for that purpose.

THE fyfte Booke^ touching all separations of gold, of silver, of copper, and
other metalls, and how a man may try them and to use them profitably. Which is
a thing very gainful for all goldsmiths, merchants and ^^her that have need
of it.
To separate gold from silver.
Beat small the silver wherein you think there is any gold, then cut it in
small pieces: than you shall put aqua fortis, in a glass of separation upon a
little fire until it be hot, cast up little bubbles like belles. Then power the
water out into a cup of copper and let it cool and by this means the silver
will stick about the cup, the which you must let dry in the cup: and when
you have powered the water out melt the silver in a hollow shard, and then
take also the gold out of the glass of separation, and melt it in one.

Another way.
TAke silver that is gilt, ^ute it upon a pot shard or a tile with lead, then
turn it as thyn and as fine as you can upon some thing, then cut it in crooked
and wr^thed pieces, and put it into the glass of separation, power in upon it
aqua fortis a finger hight above it, stop the hole above that it breath not
out, then hold it upon a slow fire until the silver be dissolved in to the
water, the gold remains in the bottom which is black: then cast out this
water into a cup of copper as before, and power upon it some clean water, and
the silver will begin to gather into a curd and will go to the bottom.

Than power out the water again, and dry the Silver with a sudden heate.
This done, put it in a croset or earthen pot, and melt it, and being molten
power it out, and do the like with the gold, and when you put it into the
melting pot, put to it a little Borax.

Another way.
TAke antimonium, and put it in a melting pot that is with a sharpe pointed
bottom, and melt it. Take also the Silver that the gold is in, and melt it and
power it into the antimonium, the gold will go to the bottom, and the silver
will tarry in the antimonium. Than take half an uncle of copper, and two vnces
of lead, and the antimonium, let them melt together, and power them into an
earthen pot, the antimonium will burn the Copper, and the Silver will abide
upon the pot.

For to seperate Gold or Silver without fire or aqua fortis.
TAke two parts of salt Armoniack, and one part of Brimstone, beat them into
powder, than annoynt your vessel, dish, or any other thing yt is gilded,
first with oil olyue, and than disparse the said powder upon it, when it is so
fast upon it, set it to the fire, and beat it over a vessel of water, and the
Gold will fall out of it.

To separate gold from Silver with a powder.
TAKE an. viii. part of Brymstone, a. xvi. part of salt. iii. vnces of salt
Armoniacke. ii. vnces of minium, and do as before is said.

To make gold softer.
TAke Mercury s^blimed, salt Armoniacke of each alike, make them into a
powder, than put your gold into a melting pot, and when it is molten, put to
it a little of this powder and it will be soft.

Another way.
TAke half an uncle of Uitrioll, half an uncle of Uerdet, half an uncle of salt
Armoniacke, half an uncle of burned Brass: al being mingled with aqua fortis,
let it so repose in the heate two days, and than let it harden: do this three
times with aqua fortis, and let it dry: make it in powder, and put always
upon it half an uncle of gold, a dragme of powder, and power it three times into
it, and it will be softer.

To make gold and silver softer.
TAke Honny and Oil of each alike, and quench your gold and silver, being
whote and glowing, three or four times in it, and it will be softer.

To soften all mettalles, and other things that are not soft, so that they
shall be soft and gentle to be wrought upon or forged.
TAke Masticke, Frankincense, Myrrh, Borax, Uernix, of each half an uncle,
make all into a powder together, and cast the bigness of two or three peasen
of it upon y^ harde things, and they will be soft and tender. Take what metal
you will, heate it upon coals, and quench it in the water of salt Armoniack
and it will be soft.

An oil that makes all metalles soft.
IF your silver be not soft, melt it, and power into it this oil that
follows. Take Saltpetre, Tartre, Salt, Uerdet, boyle all together, until the
water be consumed, power upon it peace, and let it so consume, and you shall
have an oil of it, the which you shall put into your silver while it melts,
and you shall make it soft.

To separate gold from copper.
MAke a Forneyse with a hole, that you may put in a pegge or two, the which
you may take out when you will, and vnderneth in the bottom of the Forneyse
a gutter or hole, that the king which is the gold may remain in it. Take
twyse or as much Lead as Copper, and put it upon the hole or gutter of the
Forneyse, pouring it always until there be no more lead: Than take an y^on
mete for the purpose to take away the skin of it, that it may be clear and
neat, for than shall the copper be well prepared. This done, take a quarterne
of common salt, of brimstone a quarter, of saltpetre a quarter, of orpiment a
quarter: stamp these four well in a mortar, and power the said powder upon
the copper, when it begins to run and melt, the gold will go to the bottom,
pluck the pegge out, and the king will remain in the hole or gutter, take it
out afterward with Lead or Antimonium, and you shall find the Gold.

Another way.
TAke Antimonium, and melt it with your Copper and being molten you must skimme
it well, than power it into a dish of stone, adding to it quickly as much
quick silver, cover it with another dish, shake it well together, the powder
draws the gold unto it and when it is cold again, open it, take the
Mercury out, and put it in another dish, the which you shall set upon the
fire, that the Mercury may go away in a smoke, and you shall find your Gold
in the bottom.

A powder to separate gold.
TAke salt Armoniacke, Uerdet, of each one part, Saltpetre two parts,
Antimonium as much as all the r^st together, make them into powder, and do as
before, and the Gold will go from the Copper.

To wash Gold from Copper.
TAke the Copper that is gilt, and weate it in water, and than put it in the
fire, and let it be who^e and than quench it in cold water, and the gold will
come of: rub it of with a brush of Copper wire, and it will go of.

To got together the gold out of the threedes of cloth of gold.
Burn the golden threedes into powder, and bray the said powder small upon
a Marble stone, and put it in a Basin, than power upon this powder some water
of Tartre and quick silver, and do as before, and you shall have fine gold.

To gylde so that it shall not out with no water that is.
TAke two parts of Ocre, two parts of a Pommise stone burned until it be
white, Tartre the bigness of a good walnut, bray the said colours together
with oil of Lyneseede, and five drops of Uernix, strain them thorough a
linen cloth, and you shall have the substance to gylde withal.

To gather together into one the gold that is scraped of from letters and
Images.
TAke the scrapynges and put them in a glass full of water, until the chawlke
where upon the Gold was laid, be thorough soft, wash it afterward between
both your hands:

and seperate the best you can the chalk fro the gold: take the rest, and
grind it upon a grinding stone. This done, put it again into a glass: than
put some well brayed and small, in a cup of copper, and power the water upon
it: let it sees well: and than power the same water again into the glass
upon the substance scraped, putting into the water some quick silver, and
shaking it and mouinge it together a good space. The quick silver draws to
it self al the gold: than power out al the water, and put the quick silver in
a piece of wild Goats skin, the which you shall bynde-well above: than make
a hole with a needle, whereby you shall wrynge and make the quickesiluer to
come out, and that which shall remain with in, shall be fine gold: and if the
gold be not very fair, do unto it as unto the gold before.

To take gylte from a cup that is gilded within.
TAke Pyrethrum, and sees it in strong Uinaigre, so that there may come no
smoke nor breath out of it, than power into a cup gylte within, and the gold
will go of, and go to the bottom. For the prose thereof. Caste a silver ring
gylte into it, and you shall find the experience.

To make gold soft after the melting.
TAke as many wedges of gold, as you have molten, put them one night into a
Forneyse of mortar in a pot: let them be thorough whote, but yet not so that
they melt, and they will be afterward very fair and soft.

For to give a colour to the gold that it shall be soft.
TAke salt Armoniacke fired with quick Lyme, for it is very good, works
very handsomely and sinely: but it is better to take of Viride aeris, prepared
and than melt the gold, so may you colour your gold. The Viride aeris is thus
prepared: delay it in Uinaigre, strain it thorough a felt, and let it congele,
and when it begins to wax thick, put to it some salt Armoniacke, and let
it harden a great while, or else power it upon a clean marble stone, and than
melt your gold with it, and keep it well: for it will serve you also for other
things.

To boyle gold or silver to make it receive a fair colour.
TAke Tartre well brayed, and put to it some well water or rain water, and
that which you shall boyle in it shall be fair.

To give a colour to gold.
TAke the bears of a man to y^ bigness of a finger, and lay them upon quick
coals, hold your gold over them with a pair of tongues.

To give a weygh ^vnto gold.
TAke fair water, melt lead and put it into it diverse times, the oftner the
better, yea and it were twenty times. ^ which you would make heavy, heate
it ten or twelve times, and quench it in the said water, and you shall find
it true.

For to make silver fine.
YOu shall put Silver into a pot of earth, and to every mark of Silver put
three vnces of Lead. Let it be molten together, until the flower of it ware
red. That done, put it in another earthen pot, putting to it for every mark
of silver sire vnces of Lead, and that power it, or strain it, and it will be
fine.

To make silver fair and white.
YOu shall put salt and Tatre made in powder, in a pan of Copper: put some rain
water to it, and let it sees well, for it will become white: but before you
sees them, you must heate or inflame them, and beware there come no iron into
the pan, for than the silver would become red.

To know if the silver have any gold ^ no.
DRaw a gross or great streeke with your silver up on the touche stone, than
take a dragme of Uerdet or Spanish green well made into powder with salt
Armoniacke, mix them well with good Uinaigre, until they be all of one
colour, weate the lyne or stryke made with your silver with it, and if the
silver have any gold in it, the lyne or streeke will remain a while fair, and
if there be none, the streeke will not remain fair, but will go out
incontinent. If you will have a better proof and more sure in stead of Uinaigre
put aqua fortis: for that will incontinent ^ut out the live or streeke if there
be no gold in it.

To mortify or allay Mercury or quick silver.
PUt it in a morte ^of iron, and put to it some oil olyue or oil of baize;
this done, set it on a small fire, and let it sees therein, but take heed that
the smoke of it hurt thee not, for it is un wholesome, put often times some
oil into it, and also strong Uinaigre distilled that it may boyle in it. And
by this means it will be mortified and killed. Than take it out, for it is
harde and will endure the hammer.

To gylte steel or iron.
TAke one part of Tartre, half as much of salt Armonicke, as much Uerdet, and
a little Salt: sees them in white wine, and varnish with it a harness made
even, and let it dry. And than gilt it with gold brayed or ground as
Goldsmythes do.

To separat gold or silver from metal or iron.
PUt some Mercurye in a Goldsmiths melting pot, heating it upon the fire,
putting to it and mixing with it some Uenishe glass bruised small mixing al
together. Lay it upon the silver that is gilt, than lay it upon the coals
until it be whote, and rub it with a feather over some vessel: strain the
Mercurye or quick silver thorough a linen cloth, the which you shall afterward
bring again with Saltpetre.

Silver of Tyn, to make vessel or other things.
TAKE clear, fine, and bright Tyn, put it with true and natural Tyn in the
fire, that it may purge and be made clean from all dust, ashes, and fylthe:
and when it is clean enough and well skymmed, set it again on the fire. If
there be a mark of it, take half an uncle of Mercurye, or somewhat more: and
when it begins to rise in the first heate, take also the powder of
Cantarides, and cast it into it, and a flock of woman's hear that it may
burn in it. Having had fire enough, and all being melted together: power into
it the powder aforesaid, sprincklynge it first a little with water of
Artemisia, and than take it sodaynelye from the fire, and let it cool a great
while.

To white any vessel of copper within and without with silver colour very
easily.
TAKE two parts of Mercurye, three parts of Tynne: Melt first the Tynne in
a meltynge pot, and than put the Mercurye to it. Stir it well together, and
than power it out, and let it cool, and stamp it well in a mortar until all
be brought into a powder.

Than take Alome stamp it also in a mortar, it will be like a white powder, the
which you shall lay upon a marble stone, garnished on the sides with potters
clay, in a moist cave or seller: setting under it a glass. The Alome will
turn into a water upon the stone, and will run into y^ glass. And when you
will silver your vessel of Copper, take the said water of Alom, and annoynte
your vessel with it, and let it dry.

Do thus three or four times, and leave it open that the bottom may be the
better. Than take the powder that you have made, and rub it upon it, and
your vessel will be white and seem as it were silver.

To make vessels of copper white like silver, both within and without.
TAke one part of Azure, two parts of Mercurye, three parts of white
Arsnicke, mix them together: than take grease and melt it in a pan, taking
the filth fro it, making it very clean. This done mix them together, and make
thereof as it were an ointment: annoynt your vessel with it, within and
without very well: y^ done, put it in a new dish of oak, or else in new and
fresh oken leaves, covering it well. Dig a hole and lay it in the earth,
in a place where the Sun shines most whotest, leaving it so the space of
three months, and than take it out, and make it clean with water and a
brush, and you shall find your experience.

To make that tynne crack not.
TAke strong common salt, and honey, as much of the one as of the other,
according to the quantity of your tyn, power your tyn. xii. times in it, than
strain out your tyn, for by this means it will purge and leave crackinge. Put
that in a pot, the which you shall clay or lute about very well, and set it
in a forneyse a day and a night, and you shall find as it were a lyme of
gold.

THE syxte Book* touching the making of certain oils and waters and other
substances which are of a marvelous virtue and operation.
To take Salamanders for to occupy or to serve a mans turn.
When you see the Salamanders lye and sleep in the Sun, put on a pa^er of
Gloves, and so go take them fair and softly before they caste their Uenime
(which is yellow) than put it in some vessel of glass wherein there is mans
blood. Than it will serve your turn very well.

To fine gold with Salamanders.
TAke two pound of fyled Brass or Copper, a pot Goats milk nyne
Salamanders, put all this in a pot, wide and large beneth and narrow above,
cover it with his cover fast and close, but let the cover have a bole in the
top: dig the said pot into the moyste of the earth so deep that nothing
appear but only the cover where y^ hole is, so that the Salamanders may have
air and not die. Leave it so until the seventh day after noone. Than take
your pot out and you shall find that the Salamanders constrained by hunger
shall have eaten the Copper, and the great force of the poison causes the
Copper to turn into Gold. This done, make a bole as deep as two fyngers
into the which you shall put your pot with the Salamanders, than make about it
a fire of coals, which may bourne above and beneth, yet less bebeneth than
above: and the pot is set in the ground because the copper shall not melt.

And when you think that the Salamanders be burned to ashes, take the pot
from the fire, and let it cool well. This done, put the Copper and the powder
into some vessel to wash it, and power water upon it, making clean the
Copper with the said powder: than hang it in the smoke, and let it dry well,
and you shall have good gold, and you shall let a Goldsmith fine it, and make it
clean.

The mother of all waters for to make all metalle^ liquifiable.
TAke a pound of Sal nitrum, a pound of Uitrioll, stamp each of them by it
self, and than mingle them together in a mortar, distille the said water,
without adding any other water to it: Take an uncle of the said water, an
uncle of wine not distilled, put them together in a glass, and they will bourne
o^ them selves so that you may light a candle at them: it is also the mother
of all colours.

Also take three vnces of the said water, three vnces of Mercury, the fourth
part of quick Brimstone, put them all together to dissolve in a glass. And
when they be dissolved, let the smoke come out, and you shall find the Mercury
fixed very red. And so may you fix all the Spiritus.

If you will make this water all together strong, add to the seven parts of
all these things aforesaid Uitrioll and Saltpetre, a pound of each, and
distill them, putting the water into a glass again, and it will be so
strong that it will break both iron and things made with forge.

To prepare common salt.
TAke white Salt, and power upon it some stale Pysse wherein has been (a
whole day) steeped some quick Lyme: mix them well together six times a
day, and let it repose the night, strain the peace thorough a felt, and put
all that is within into a pan leaded within, mingling it well together until
it become water. Than sees it upon coals until it be harde, and make it into
a powder, and put it in a Ox bladder bynding it well above, and than hang it
in a caudron full of whote water, leaving it there until the salt be turned
into water. Do this ten times, and at last time lot it burn so that it be a
fire and red, than let it cool, and thus is common salt prepared.

To prepare salt Armoniacke*
TAke ten pound of prepared salt, and power upon it some warm peace of a man
that is in health, and hath not drunk but wine, and let the salt dissolve in
the said peace, and go to the bottom, than strain it thorough a felt into a
caudron, put to it some soute of a Bakers oven, boiling it together: When this
salt is dry: power upon it some mans peace, do this so lunge until the ten
pots of urine be consumed in the ten pound of salt.

You must take heed, that the Caudron run not over, when the Uryne boils.
If peradventure it rise so that there is great danger of rynnyngs over: You
shall power some clear water upon it, and mix all together until all turn
into water, let it stand, and caste the clear out, and sees it so lunge
until it be dry, the which being dry, you shall take and put in a new
dyshe, and dry it in the Sun: And than sublyme it in this wise.

Take the said two pound, and two pound of fyled iron, and myngle them well
together, and put them into a vessel, that is called rotunda, lutynge it
well with lutum sapientiae: Than set it upon a Tryue^ in a Forneyse of
sublimation, making a good fire under it one day, during until the vessel
be thorough red whote vnderneth.

Then let it cool again in the night until the morning and then open it,
and you shall find upon the vessel white salt, the which you shall take away,
and putting to it as much common salt prepared, you shall bray them both well
together the space of half a lunge somer day, making a small and flow fire
under it, let it cool again, and bray it again, and sublime as before. This
do you three times, and then keep it for it is good.

To make sal alkali.
TAke the ashes of leese of wine burned, quick lime, of each equal quantity,
and put them into three stillitorie glasses one over another, to the intent
that that which falls fro the one may distill into the other: then power the
water of the lower most into the uppermost, having a pot leaded vnderneth. Put
often times the same lye thorough it until the ashes be no more bitter. Let the
same lye stand a night, and sees it in the morning in a pot leaded until the
water consume away and become harde. Then let it cool, you shall find a
stone in it called Alkali, the which you shall beat in powder, and fill a new
pot with it half full, and cover it not, put it in a forneise of calcination,
making at the first a little fire until it sees: then a great fire until
it begin to melt like lead, then power it quickly into another pot, and let it
cool, and it will be sal Alkali, which you must keep in a glass.

To make sal boras.
TAke tarter calcined in such sort as we will declare afterward, the same
being made in powder, put some hot water upon it until it dissolve, styryng
it well with a stick, then strain it thorough a lynen cloth, do as before, so
long until the water be thick and troubled, then strain it thorough a bag
until it ware clear, and hath taken the bytternes out of the leese or
tartre: which thing you shall know when the leese pricks no more upon your
tongue. Then take sal commune praeparatum, putting to it water of tartre, power
them together into a pan of iron or frying pan seething them until they be
thick, and then put them in a new pot until they be harde. You shall turn
often times the pot, when the said pot would cleave or burn to let it cool,
and open it, you shall have sal boras philosophorum, as good as the true boras.

Water of Mercurye.
TAke a quartren of sublimed and fixed mercurie and as much of the stone
galitsenstein: bray them together upon a marble stone: then hauig put them in a
line bag, make a hole in an horse donghill, put them in a glass into the
same hole not touching the sides of the hole in any wise, to the intent it fyle
or soil not, make two founells, and hang the bag with mercurie and
galitsenstein over the glass covering it with a good strong linen cloth that
nothing fall into it: then lay donge enough upon it, and leave it so a
fortnight together until the mercury be stilled as water out of the bag. If
the water be not white enough, bray it again with the galitsenstein, and do
as before, continuing it until the water be good ad lunam faciendam.

Water of salt armoniack.
TAke salt armoniack as much as you will, as much of the yelkes of eggs, mix
them well together, putting to them a little vynegre, that it may drop or run
the better. Then hang it over a glass in a dongehill as before is said of
the water of mercurye, or ells set it upon an even stone smooth slypperye in a
moist cellar, layenge the stone a little at one side and setting a glass
vnderneth with a founell, and mortar at one side of the stone that it may not
run but into the fonnell. Then pass it thorough a feit, and keep it well. For
it will serve your turn very aptly.

A water called aqua lactis virginis.
TAke Litarge made in powder, and put it in a pan with good Uinaigre, sees it
with a little fire, and pass it thorough a white felt until it wax clear and
while it distills, put it ever in again until it be clear and white. Than
take axungia vitri, made in powder, and sift it, and do with it, as with the
Lytarge, and there will come also water out of it: Mire these two waters
together, and they will be as white as milk, and it is called lac virginis.

Water of salt alkali.
TAke salt Alkali, and yelkes of Eggs, bray them with good Uinaigre, and do
as is before said, of the water of Mercurye.

A water called aqua croci Martis.
MAke of the green Galitsenstein stone into powder: and fill therewith a new
pot and steep it well. Burn it even in such sort as is, said before of the
Alome. When it is as red as Vermilion it is enough.

Than put some good Uinaigre into a Limbecke and distill it in a Forneyse with
a small fire. Do thus three times. Afterwards put into it as much as into the
red Galitsenstein stirring them always together with an iron three days
lunge. Put them again into a Limbecke, and styll them as before. If the water
be not red enough, put more of the said powder unto it, stirring it well
together, and distillynge it as before, it will be very good Crocus Martis to
make Gold.

To calcyne Tartre.
TAke Tartre of white wine, wash it with what^ water, and let it dry. Than
fill a pot of a quart with the said Tartre, covering it well above, and set
it in a Forneyse of calcination, and let it burn until there come out no
manner of smoke. Than let it cool, and make it in powder, and put it into
another pot, luting it well with Lutum saplentiae, than leave it in a Forneyse
of Calcination, wherein there is a good fire, the space of three days or more,
until the Tartre be as white as Salt, the which you shall keep in some
warm place.

To calcine egg shells.
Wash Egg shells in lixiuio colatitio and let them dry: take away before
or after the little skin that is in them. Than put them in a great pot upon
the fire, and burn them to ashes stireinge them well. Than put them in a little
pot, and do as with the Tartre. When they be burned as white as chaulke, they
be calcined enough.

To calcine or burn Turia.
REd Tutia or yellow is the best: put the same into a meltynge pot, and set it
upon the fire, and let it burn whote. Quench it then in good Uinaigre. Do so
nine times, and than bray it small like unto flower upon a stone and keep it.

A water called aqua lunaris.
TAke an hundred Hen eggs, take out the yelke and beat the white, put it
into a glass, and stope it well above, set it in Horse dung. xiiii. days, go
to it every day, and take the dung from about it with a stick, leaving it
so a good hour that it may have the air, than cover it again.

And when it hath been there a lunge time, there will come out of it a water,
the which you shall power into another glass and let it cool, that which was
congeled upon the water cast away, and put into it some lyme of eggs, that
the water may be above it four fingers broad: mingle them together, and power
them in again stoppynge it well, and set it again in the horse dung, leaving
it so a long time as before, than take it out, and put it in a meltynge pot,
stirrynge it well, and set it upon a white felt, and by the measure that it
distills in, power it again upon it, continuing so until the water be
clear, cast out the lees and the water is good ad Lunam or Solemn.

Aqua causata.
TAke two pound of the ashes of lees of wine burned, a pound of ashes of
Walnut shells burned, two pound of the ashes of burned bean stalks; a
pound* of the ashes of the slips or twigs of Vines: Mingle all these
together, and power water upon them, and add to it some quick Lyme, for each
pound of the said substance, you must have two pound of water, than let it
sees together one seething and let it stand and repose a day and a night,
stirring it sire times a day.

This done, power that which is clear into a caudron, put to it an uncle of
Arsnicke, an uncle of Reagall, an uncle of calcined Tartre, and a quarterne of
Salt armoniacke, make all into powder, and put it into water, and let it sees
unto the half, let it cool again: and than put it in a Limbeck, and distil
it as is said. And when it will distill no more, let it cool, and open the
limbecke, and power it in again, and distill it thus five times, and keep the
water diffilled. Mercurye is hardened and fixed in the same water as we have
said in another place: keep also the lees, for it is good for to harden
Mercury as thus. Take Mercurye, put it in a melting pot, and heate it, power
the foresaid Lees into it, and mingle them together, and it will kill the
Mercury and make it hard and black, so that being cold again, it is as hard
as a stone, the which you may sublime.

A water callad aqua causcica.
TAke one part of sal Alkali, one part of common Alome, one part of alumen
plumae, one part of white Galitsenstein stone, one part of salt Armoniacke, two
parts of common salt prepared, bray all these very small and fine upon a
gryndstone, and weate them with Uinaigre, or very whote water, and put them in
a glass, the which you shall dig and set in a dunghill, leaving it there
three weeks. All will be turned into water, put the same water into a melting
pot, do as before you did with the felt, distilling it thoro we the felt into
another melting pot. Keep it to in a glass, for it is good to make silver.
The felt must be sharpe at the neither end and broad above.

Aqua auri pigmenti.
TAke four pa^es of orpiment, two parts of salt Armoniacke, one part of
calcined Egg shells, and one part of common salt, bray these well upon a
marble stone, weate them with Uinaigre, and let them run of from the stone
into a glass in a seller or set them under a dunghill, until they be turned
into water. Than distill it as you do aqua fortis. But in braying the orpiment,
you must stopppe your mouth and your nose, because of the smoke or fume of the
water, which is hurtful.

Water of common salt prepared.
TAke a pound of common salt, a quarterne of alome bray them upon a Marble
stone with Uinaigre, and let it run from the stone as before is said, and
distill it thorough a felt, and it is made.

Water of yelkes of Eggs.
TAke yelkes of Eggs sodden very harde, stamp them and put them in a
Limbecke, the first water which comes out is white, the other red and
thick: but when it is cold, it is thinner and liquid. All that you rub
with the same water, gets always a good colour of gold.

Oil of Tartre.
TAke white Tartre calcined, bray it well upon a Marble stone, and let it
run into a glass, as is before said of the salt Armoniack, and of the
crocus martis. And when all is run into the glass, pass it thorough a felt
so often until it be clear. And keep it in a clean glass.

An oil called olcum Laterinum or Petroleum.
TAke a new tyle whereon there hath been no manner of water, make it whote, and
lay it in oil of Walnuts, until it soak or drink no more: Than make it into
powder, and put it in a Limbecke and distill it. And when it will distill no
more, caste it out, and put in other, and do as before three times, and you
shall have your oil.

Oleum benedictum.
TAke oil Olyue in steed of oil of Walnuts, and do as before.

Oil of Brymstone.
TAke a pound of Brimstone well made in powder, a pound of oil of Lyneseede:
put them in a pot leaded, and boyle them together until there rise a red
froth or skymme upon them. Put Uinaigre into it, and the oil will begin to
rise up, and taking of the froth or skimme, keep it, and keep the oil neat
and clean. Than wash pour Brymstone very clean, and power some oil of
Walnuts upon it, and let it sees as before, and when it wareth red as
before, power again some Uinaigre upon it, and skym of the oil, and keep it
with the first. Do this so lunge until the Brymstone smoke no more, wheather
it be set upon what coals or upon a whole plate. Than wash it in whote
water, let it dry. Than put it into a thick bag, and hynde it so that the
Brymstone may spread abroad in it. Put into a pot some quick lyme four
fingers thick, and lay the bag with the Brymstone abroad upon it: Than
power some good Uinaigre into it that it may be a handful high above the lyme,
and let it sees a whole day. Than take the Brymstone out of the bag, and
wash it well in whote water, power out the water and let it dry, and it will
be Sulphur purgatum praeparatum.

A note.
TAKE that which before you have gathered together, and make a strong Lie of
it, with quycke Lyme and Ashes of wine Lees burned, take twyse as much of the
saw Lie, and sees them together until they be as it were Soap. Put the
skymme or froth of the same into a glass, which you shall set in a dunghill
ten days. Than bray it, and put it in a Limbecke, and distill it as before is
said, and that which remains in the Limbecke is oleum fixum sulphuris, with
this oil you may fix all things.

To purge Brymstone.
TAke commom Brimstone, stamp it very small, and sift it: put it in a pot
leaded with three feet, and power into it some good Uinaigre, let it sees
slowly a day and a night, skymme it with a wooden spoon full of little holes
like a skymmer. When the Uinaigre hath thus boiled with it a day and a night,
put to it stale peace that is well sodden and well skymmed and passed thorough a
felt. Let it so sees with the peace two days and two nights, and skimme it
as before, and pass it so often thorough the felt until the water be clear.
Than let it dry in the Sun, and it is purged.

To sublyme Brymstone.
TAke purged Brimstone, as I have taught you before in the chapter of oil of
Brymstone, of* the which you will: Take thereof a pound of Brimstone calcined,
as is said in the chapter before, a poud of offall of iron, iron bruised small
a quartene, bray them well and sift them, than put them into a Lymbecke,
which hath a hole above, the which you shall stop with a piece of iron
plate, lute well with clay the sublimatorie that no breathe go out, and set
it in a Forneyse to sublime, making a little fire vnderneth it, look now and
than under the piece of iron plate: the which when it is no more moyste, stop
the hole we lutum sapientiae, and make the fire a little greater, and leave it
so six hours. Than take it of, and that which sticks fast above upon i^,
rub it of with an Hares foot. Stir it again with the lees that remains
under, and set it in again sublime it as before. Dee thus three times, and
always rub of that, which you find above upon it, and keep it, and bray
the lees by it self, and do as before, until they smoke no more upon the
fire: Than caste them out, and take one part of this sublimed Brymstone, two
parts of commom salt prepared, bray them well together, and sublime them as
before, laying first a plate upon the hole. Having done this five times, take
of the Brymstone before sublimed, and bray it with twyse as much common salt
prepared. And sublime it so often that the Brymstone be as white as Snow and
than there will be enough. Keep it.

Oil of Eggs.
TAke Egg shells stamped, having the little skyn within taken away, keep
them. Than take the yelks of Eggs, and beat them well in a pot, and set a
glass of them under a dung hill of whote horsedung the space of eight days
together. Than take it out, and put the said Eggs into a Limbecke, and lute
it well, and distill them thus three times, and there will come Oleum ouorum.

Oleum auri pigmenti.
TAke auri pigmentum, and bruise it small, and sees it with oleum lunare in a
little pot leaded. And when it is half consumed, put it in a Limbecke and
distill it: Than take the Lees, and bray them upon a Marble stone, and put them
again into ye Limbeck, and power again upon it the same oil: do thus three
times and keep it, for it is good ad fixationem.

Oleum lunare.
TAKE as much of aqua lunaris described before, as you will, distill it in a
Limbecke until it wax dry, and you shall have your Oil, wherewith you may
fix all kinds, and harden also Mercury.

Oil of Brymstone.
BRay Brymstone with Tartre in manner of pap, put it in a glass upon a fire of
quick coals. iii. dates than bray it again, and distill it in a Limbecke, and
that is called oleum sulphuris.

To sublyme Mercurye.
TAke a peunde of Mercury, a quarterne of salt armoniacke, power upon it good
vinaigre, that they may be liquid: mingle them together, and let them so
stand until the next morrow. Bray them well upon a Marble stone, for al must be
brought into powder before you put the vinaigre to them. When you have thus
brayed them that the Mercury appears no more, let it dry, and bray it well
so dry without vinaigre, Than put it in a Limbeck, and sublime it in a
forneise of sublimation, as before is said of the y^ Brymstone: bind fast the
felt about the Limbecke that nothing breathe out. The first. ii. hours you
shall make a s^a^e fire under it, until the moisture come out above, which you
shall know by the vapour that is upon the piece of plate: than stop the hole,
and make a greater fire under it two hours long: than increase the fire four
hours lunge: than let it cool by little and little, and than open it and you
shall find the Mercury as white as a Lylly above, and that which sticks on
the side, and lies upon the lees, rub it of with a feather, and bray it
with the lees and strong vinaigre as before, let it dry and sublime it as
before. This do so long until the lees smoke no more upon the coals. Than
take the Mercury sublimed, and twyse as much common salt prepared, mingle them
together, and sublime them in a Limbecke as before. Do this three times.
Sublime the lees as is said until they smoke no more upon the coals, than
cast them away. And if the Mercury be not as white as Snow, take other commom
Salt prepared, and sublyme it again, until it be white enough.

FINIS.
A necessary Table conteynyng the summaries of all the receyptes, and
medicines, treated of in this present volume.
AGainst every grief or payne of the head, except the pockes. Fol. 1 A
preservative against the falling sickness or epilepsia. Idem Against the
falling sickness. idem Another sovereign remedy for the same. idem Against
the palsy. idem Another way. idem Against the Fransey. idem A tried remedy
against the great pain ringynge and defnesse of the ears. fol. 3 Another
remedy well known and tried. idem A remedy to stench the bleeding at the
nose. idem Another for the same well proved and of a marvelous strength. idem
Another sovereign remedy. idem Another for the same. idem For the tooth ache
a remedy proved. idem Another remedy, wheather the ache be by cold or by
heate. idem Another for the same. idem Another remedy. idem A remedy for the
stinking of the mouth nose. fol. 4 Another for the same. idem A very good
gargarisme or gargellinge for the throat against the Quinsy. idem For the
same. idem Another for the same. idem An excellent plaster to soften or ripe
an impostume in the throat. idem Against spitting of blood coming of the
Lunges or Lights. idem For the same another remedy tried and proved. idem
Another remedy found very singular. idem Another remedy of marvelous great
virtue. idem Another secrete for the same, certain and experimented and good
at all hours. fol. 5 For the same. idem Another for the same. idem Against the
vlceration of the Lunges or Lights, and Spittell full of matter and
corruption. idem Another for the same. idem Another for the same. idem A
remedy for short winded men. idem A drink for the same disease, to be taken
every day thryse. fol. 6 Another tried secrete good for poor folk. idem For
the same and good also for the poor sort. idem A remedy against the pluresie.
idem A decoction for the stomach, very good against the pluresie. idem
Another remedy most certain against all pluresies, as proved as divine, for to
preserve a man that he dye not of it. idem An ointment to rot or ripe the
plurcsie. fol. 7 A plaster for the same. idem For the same. idem Against the
whote cogh, that is to say, when the patient is sovexed with it that he can not
well sleep. idem Against the same, if his voice be hoarse with it. idem A tried
electuary for the same. idem Again for the cogh. idem Pills for the cogh.
idem An ointment for the same. idem Against the tremblinge and panting of the
heart, this is very good, but especially for women, which are subject
thereunto. fol. 8 A remedy against the same, and very good to restore the
strength, being weakened with to great heate of agues. idem Another remedy
where with I have always found my self very well. idem An epitheme against
the same pain. idem An ointment very good for poor folk, that are not able
to bye y^ foresaid medicine or nourishment. i'd Another compo^tio very good in
the time of a plague as well to prese rue as to heal. fol. 9 Another oyntme nt
very good and principally for children that are troubled with worms. idem A
remedy against the worms in young children. idem A remedy against the pain of
the stomach. idem Another remedy for the same, when all other will not profit
him. idem A vomentation or nourishment very singular for the same. idem
Another against the same. idem Another remedy. idem Another very good. fol. 10
Another remedy proved. idem A nourishment very good against y^ same disease.
idem a little bag to cary about one against y^ same disease. i'd A drink for the
same. idem Another remedy to lay to the stomach. idem Another remedy well tried
proved, and good chiefly for yonge children, vexed with the pain of the
stomach, which is known if they vomit or belch. i'd A remedy against an
impostume in the stomach. idem Against the same. fol. 11 A plaster for the
same. idem A nourishment or keeping of the stomach in his natural heate, by
washing or bathing it. idem A remedy against vomiting. idem An oyntmet very
good against choleric vomitig. i'd another remedy against flemetick vomiting.
idem A remedy against the hicket or yexing. idem Another. idem Remedies against
y^ pain of the Liver come through ventositie. idem Another of very good
effect. idem A remedy found very good against the Liver that is appostumate
or corrupted. fol. 12 For the same. idem Remedies against the dropsye. idem
Against the same. idem A drink of great virtue and strength and against the
windy dropsye. idem Another remedy very good to take after a purgation. idem
Remedies against the dropsye called ascites, a drink very good to take once a
week. idem A singular good electuary for the same, which ought to be
disclosed but to your special friends. fol. 13 An ointment for the same. idem
Another ointment very good. idem A remedy against the yellow ^aunders. idem
Remedies against the colic. idem A remedy never to have the colic more.
idem Another remedy to take in the pain and tourment of the colic. idem A
very good powder that heals quickelye the said sickennes. fol. 14 A remedy
which I have found to be very good for all griofe or pain of the guts or
entrails. idem A glitter wherewith I have cured many. idem Another against the
same. idem Another for the same. idem An ointment against the same. idem A
very good receipt which pope Element the seventh took in his last sickness.
idem A remedy against the late or ^i^e come of choler. fol. 15 An ointment very
good for the same. idem Remedies against the laxe disentericke. idem Another
drink very good. fol. 16 Another remedy. idem Another drink very good in
case the Patient have therewith any great dolor in his belly (as often times
it happens) by reason of exulceration and knawing of the guts. idem Another
remedy when the pain is great. idem Suffamigations or smokings for the same.
idem The first. idem The second. idem Another remedy for the same. idem An
ointment very good for the bloody fi^e. idem Remedies against the swelling and
oppilation or s^pping of the spleen. fol. 17 A fomentatio or nourishing by wash
^ for ye same ^ An ointment against the same. idem Another fomentation or
bathing for the same. idem Remedies against the pain; swelling, and ventositie
of the matrice. idem Another ^d of some women. idem Another remedy very good
web knows of women ^ 18 Another. idem A fomentat^on or nouryshyng. idem A very
good ointment. idem A plaster or clothe to lay upon the matrice if grief de
old or inveterate. idem Remedies to make a womans time to come that is let or
hindered by some cause. idem Another remedy very good also to cause a woman to
bring forth the child before the time, if the woman be in danger of it. idem A
washing very good for the same. idem Against to much abondaunce of flowers.
idem An ointment against the same. idem Against ye prefocatio or strangling of
the matrice. i'd Against the same of what cause so ever it come. idem Another
against the same. idem Against the same. idem against the same. idem Remedies
to be used when the Matrice comes out of her natural place or falls. idem
A plaster very good. idem Remedies for the Matrice corrupted or apostumated, a
plaster for to dissolve it. idem Another plaster for the same. idem A
plaster. idem Remedies against the ulcers or corrupt matter of the Matrice.
idem A drink for the same. idem Remedies against the white f^ire of women.
idem Another against the same. fol. 21 A drink. idem A powder against the
same. idem Remedies against pissing whote. idem A syrop. idem A drink against
the same, to take three hours before dinner and at noone. idem Against
gonothea, which is when a mans seed goth from him unwittingly. idem An
ointment against the same. idem Another remedy marvelous good. idem Remedies
for them that peace blood. idem An ointment for the same. fol. 22 A plaster
for the same. idem Remedies against the gravel. idem Another. idem Another
remedy well tried where by I have often times found my self eased. idem
Against the same. idem Another very good. idem Reteyptes to hasten the
chyldbyrth, and to mitigate the pain of the travail and labour. idem Another.
idem Another. fol. 23 Another. idem Another remedy very good, but yet such one
that may not be given, but in great necessity, or when the child is dead
within her belly. idem Remedies when a man pisseth against his will. idem
Another for the same. idem Remedies against the stone in the bladder. idem A
remedy preservative against the same. idem Another for the same. idem Remedies
for to heal the Emerhodes or Piles, a very excellent ointment. fol. 24. A
plaster against the same. idem An excellent very good hot bathe for y^ same.
idem Another remedy of very great virtue. idem Remedies against the swelling
of the coddes. idem Another against harde swelling. idem A good plaster for
the same. idem An ointment against the same. idem A plaster. fol. 25 Remedies
against the sciatica. idem Remedies against inflammations of blood which
grows into an impostume in some part of the body or members, called
phelgmone. idem A plaster to ripe and to ret an impostume. idem Another for
the same. idem Another to rot or ripe incontinent. idem Against a ringworme or
tettre that runs all over a mans face, or against y^ disease that is called
Fry^pilas or Lichen, of some Mentagra, the Frenchme call it feu volage, as it
were a running fire. fol. 26 Another remedy very good to heal the same, when it
doth but begin to increase. idem Against flematicke swelling. fol. 27
Remedies for the scabs. idem An ointment very good for to annoynt young
children who because of their tenderness, can not endure a purgation. idem
Another ointment very good for little children old folk to use before and
after a purgation. idem Another remedy. idem A bain or bathe for the same.
idem against the scurfe or leprie called in latin psora. idem A remedy against
puffs, bladders, blysters, or wheles, and against the small pockes. idem an
ointment. idem another remedy well tried. idem against the strong cogh of young
children. fol. 28 against the stinking sweat. idem against the pain of the
eyes. idem For a white spot in the eyes. idem Against the difficulty of
bringing forth child, and the retention of the shin that the child is
wrapped in, called in latin secundina or secundae. idem A remedy when the
foundement comes out. idem Against the pain of the guts. idem against the
difficulty in making water saving for that which comes of the stone. idem
For men. idem For women. idem Against Crabl^ce. fol. 29 Against a Canker. idem
Against the little worms and itching of the hand or body. idem Against the
swelling of the coddes. idem To make the worms come out of ye hands or feet.
i'd A remedy for defnes of the ears. idem A remedy against fistuleys. fol. 30
For the scabs of the hands. idem A water of a great and marvelous effect
for to keep mans body fro many infirmities diseases. idem What operations come
of such distillations. idem Another water or Balsamum, almost for the same
things. idem A pounder very good to conserve the sight. fol. 31 Against the
pain of the flanks or the pluresye. idem Against quartaine agues. idem To
heal old wounds and cankers of the leg. idem against the scurfe. idem
Against al ventositie, colic or pain of ye matrice. i'd For the hardness or
brawn of the feet. idem To make very perfect Uinaigre. idem Against the
falling syckennesse. fol. 32 For children that be broke. idem Against the pain
of the spleen. idem For to stench^ blood. idem For to heal in four days the
scalding with water, or any other thing, without ointments or plasters it hath
bane tried and found true. idem For to stench blood. idem Against the worms
in little children. idem To ^eale the Emerhodes or Piles. idem Against all
kinds of pain and grief. idem Against styfnes or shrinkinge of synowes,
called the cramp or swelling, coming of the wound taken of some venomous
beast in latin spasmus or couulsio. 33 For them that can not peace, by reason
of certain gravel and carnositie which is abundance of flesh. idem Against
defnes. idem Against opilation or stoppyng. idem Against the the gyddinesse of
the sight. idem For them yt can not broke their meat, but vomit it again.
idem Against the head ache by to much drinking. idem Against all the pain of
the head. idem Against the pain of the head yt continues always. i'd Another
way. idem Another way. fol. 34 Against the megrame happening suddenly. idem
Against itching of the head. idem Against ulcers or scabs of the head as well
of men as of women. idem Against old and putrified wounds. idem To keep yt
the flesh grow not to much in a would. idem To heal and take away the scurfe.
idem For to kill Lice. idem Against the distillation of the brain and heaviness
of the head. idem Against murs or catars that begin to grow. idem For to
refrain the murre or catarre. idem A remedy for the disease when the hear of
the beard or head falls of, of it self. fol. 35 To keep that the hear
shall not fall of. idem To make ye bear of a mas head or ^eard to grow. idem
For to make hears grow. idem For to curl hear, a rare secrete. idem For to
make hear black. idem To keep yt the hears wax not hoar or white. idem For
to make the hears black. idem Against the pain in the eyes. idem Against the
dimness or daselyng of the sight. fol. 36 Another way. idem Against a web
or spot in the eye. idem To take away y^ hurtful hears of the eye brows. i'd
Against all pain of the ears. idem Against the pain of the ears defnes, for
to purge the apostumes or corruption of the ears. idem Against the pain of
the ears. idem Against the noise or ringing of the ears. idem Against all
infirmity of the ears. idem Against defnes and hardness of hearing. fol. 37
Against the pain of the ears, defnes, durte or fylthe, worms or water that
is in them. idem For to stench bleeding at the nose. idem To heal the sickness
called noli me tangere. idem Against stynking of the mouth. idem Against the
tothe ache. idem Another way. idem For to make teeth fall out. idem For to
make teeth white that be black. idem For them that be hoarce. idem To heal
the disease called the kings evil. idem Howe to know the kings evil. idem
Against the cegh and distillation of the breast and lunges, and running of the
eyes, pain of the bladder, and when the pipe of it is stopped, which causes
that a man can not peace, but with great difficulty, also for those that spit
blood at the mouth, or pysse blood, and for the flire, and colic pain, or
beauynes of the belly and choler, and also against a vomiting without an ague,
also against all pain of the body, except of the head, and especially against
the vlce^ation of the lunges, if you give the patient an electuary or two of
it. fol. 38 Against all vehement coghes. idem Against the cogh be it never so
great. idem For one y^ hath swallowed down a blood sucker. idem Against an old
and inveterate cogh. idem Against the bloody flixe coming of the artere or
synowe of the lunges or of the liver. idem For to restrain a great and vehement
vomiting. fol. 39 For them that can not keep their meat in the stomach but
vomit it up again. idem To quench and assuage thrust. idem Another way.
idem To stop the hicket. idem For to stop the hicket that comes often.
idem A souerain remedy for them y^ have wry necks, by reason of shroken
sinews: for them y^ have y^ gout. i'd To take away swelling under the
armeholes. idem Against apostumes swelling at ye rote of y^ nailes. i'd To make
a mas nailes grow which be fallen of. idem Against the disease called lychen,
which is a foul breaking out of al ye face with a scab, beginnig at y^ chin. i'd
To take away the scab of a running ^ettre c. fol. 40 Against burgeons pushes in
the face. c. idem Against all spots, pimples, pushes, or ulcers. c. idem To
take away the blacknes of the neck. c. idem Against the bruising of the face by
a fall or slip. idem Another very good. idem Against war^s and malanders. idem
Against swelling of the stomach, pain of the rains, gravel, fleam,
colic, the emerbodes, or piles, also to stay the flowers of a woman, and for
those that have an infected liver spleen, also for those y^ cogh and for them
that have the falling sickness. idem Against the pain of the spleen. idem
Another. fol. 41 For the pain of the loins or haunches. idem Against swelling
or ulcers of the rains of the back. i'd Against the pain of the gravel, and
for to. c. idem Against the pain of the rains. idem Against the gravel. idem
Against the pain of the bladder and gravel. idem Against y^ blody flixe, or
fretting torment in. c. fol. 42 Against the straining, fretting griping of. c.
idem For those that have fretting and griping in the belly and the laxe. idem
Against the colic. idem Against the pain of the colic coming suddenly.
idem Against the pain of the guts or bowels. idem For to stop the laxe.
idem Against the fretting of the belly or laxe. idem For to know a secret or
hidden disease of any man, and to heal the same. fol. 43 For them that void
blood at their foundement, and for those that have their blood broken. idem
Against the worms y^ engender in men's bodies. idem Against the griping of the
belly, desire to go to stole, and yet do nothing. idem Against the pain of the
colic. idem Against the ulcers fistules in y^ foundement. c. idem To heal
y^ emerhodes or those ye lose their blood. idem Against the ulcers of the
foundement, against the disease called commonly S. Fiacres sickness. idem For to
ripe or break an impostume or. c. idem Another. idem Against hurting or
flawing of the skyn by cha^ing and going either of the feet or between the
thighs, id^ Against ye swelling pain of the soles of the fete. 44 To make
wartes fall of. idem For to take away y^ felons cats hears which break out we
wheles in the fingers, also knops. c. idem For to assuage the pain of the
gou^e. c. idem Another way. idem For to get out any thing y^ sticks in a
mans. c. idem Certain receiptes against the plague. idem A compposition
preservative against the pestilence excellent as it were triacle or
Mythridatum. fol. 45 Another composition in powder, or in other. c. idem Common
piles very good for the same. idem Antidotes or medicines preseruatiues
cofortable of small cost easy to find prepare for poor folk. i'd Another
medecin. fol. 46 Things of favour or sweet smell, as powder, balls, waters,
perfumes, and first a powder for. c. idem A parfume. idem A smelling balle.
idem Another sweet balle meter for the summer. fol. 47 Outward remedies to
purge the air, the easyest, the presentest, and those that are of the smallest
price for men of small hability. idem A powder against the worms. idem The
whole sum of the regiment and governing of a mans life. idem A sovereign
remedy against the venom of the plague for rich men and for princes. fol. 48
A powder for poor folk of no less efficacy strength then the second. idem
A drink for poor folk, and in a place where there is none or very little
juice either of syrope, cytrons, lemons, or pomegrades. idem A drink often
times tried, profitable wholesome, yt which (as many men say) was never found
vain. idem Opiate. idem A drink mete after every taking of the said opiate, or
to be mixed we the takinges of the same opiate, for the strongest or meanest
men, according. c. 49 A drink for poor folk. idem A drink to cause one to
sweat. idem Another drink for poor folk. idem An epitheme or medecin to
lay to the. c. idem An epitheme for the heart good for poor folks which may
also serve for the liver. idem An epitheme or medecin for the liver. idem
Local medecines, first a plaistor or. c. fol. 50 Another easy drawing
medecin. idem Medecines of y^ kinds yt burn ye skyn or flesh. c. i'd Another
plaster. idem Another stronger. idem A medecin that cleanses and purifieth.
idem Another very good. idem A plaster incarnatife. idem A repercussife
resolutiue ointment against. c. fol. 51. A plaster for to stop the g^awinge
or eating of the canker. idem An ointment very sweet for cankers that have
corrupt matter in them, which also alayeth the pain of those that have no
corrupt matter in them. idem An ointment of marvelous virtue against the eating
and running of the canker, and to take away all the grief of the same. idem A
plaster mitigatiue and very gentle for cankers, specially of the breasts or
paps. fol. 52 First to harden iron. idem For to harden knyues and other such
like. idem For to harden a fyle or other instrument of iron. idem To harden any
other substance material. idem To make any instrument of steel hard sharpe.
idem Another. idem To keep it fro cleaving when it is a hardining. fol. 53 To
make iron or steel soft. idem Another. idem To soder all things and first
iron. idem To soder any whote thing. idem To soder Copper. fol. 55 To soder
iron. idem A powder that will make all metal pliable soft. idem Another upon
brass. idem To grave in iron or steal, knives harness. idem To grave with
water. idem Another stronger and more bytyng. fol. 56 To make a colour of gold
or silver to lay upon metal, and to make also a ground of gold or silver, upon
iron, bells, stones, which shall not go of with water. i'd A colour of gold to set
upon bras or copper. idem A colour of gold upon brass. fol. 57 To make Copper
of a silver colour. idem To gilt iron or steel. idem To make a water for to
gilt upon iron or steel. idem To keep all ma^er of iron or steel, and also al
manner of instruments of war. idem To bring a cloth that was stained to his.
c. idem To take spots out of cloth. fol. 58 Another way. idem A water to take
spots out of white clothe. idem To take spots of grease or oil out of white
cloth. i'd To take spots of grease or oil out of all sorts of cloth or other
things. idem Another. idem To take spots of wine out of all manner of cloth.
idem To take all manner of spots out of silk. idem To take all spots out of
crymsen velvet. fol. 59 A water take all spots out of gold velvet. idem To make
a Soap that takes out all spots. idem To take spots of black ink or other
things. c. idem To take spots out of scarlet or velvet of colours with out
vurting any thing at al the colour. idem To take spots of oil fro parchment or
white paper. 60 To die thread, yarn or linen cloth into a. c. idem To die
thread or linen cloth blew. idem A blew colour to dye all things. idem
Another way to dye blew. idem To dye red. fol. 61 Another way. idem To make
fair roset. idem To die wodde, bones and horne into green. idem Another
green. idem To die, horne, bone, and wodde into redd^. idem To dye yellow.
fol. 62 To die black. idem To make horne soft. idem To mollify or soften
horne so that you shall imprynte or make any figures in it. idem Another way.
idem To cast horns in a m^d^ like lead. idem To make clear stones of amber.
idem Another fol. 63 To polish to give a gloss unto precious stones. idem To
make a stone that shall give fire and burn of it self if you weate it with your
finger. idem To ^ollifie or soften Crystal and precious stones ^o that you
may cut them like these, and that being put in a mould they shall be harde
again. idem To counterfeit pearls which shall be very fair, and as they were
natural and true. idem To prepare Mercury, so to harden it, that you may
make it liquid and work it. fol. 64 A substance made of paper or other
things, to express or set out any manet of figure y^ you will upon. c* idem How
to bray gold for to gilt with. fol. 65 To g^lt copper. idem To gilt pro^. idem
To take of the gold from silver that is gilt, so that the silver shall remain
whole and sound. idem To seperat ^iluer fro copper, be it money or c. idem
A^der which being la^ng upon any thing silvered will take of the silver from it.
idem To convert and turn copper into brass. fol. 66 To melt al metal
perfit^. idem For to give a colour of gold upon copper. idem To make verdet or
spanish green. idem To make a white colour of lead. idem To make Lutum
sapientie. fol. 67 To l^te or dawde pots with a linen cloth that will not
bur^ idem To soder glasses. idem Another lutum sapientie. idem To seperat gold
from silver. fol. 68 Another way. idem To seperat gold or silver without fire or
aqua fortis. i'd To seperat gold from silver with a powder. idem To make gold
softer. idem Another way. fol. 69 To make gold and silver ^ idem To soften
all metalls, and other things that are not soft so that they shall be soft
gentle to be wroughts upon or forged. idem A^ ^yle that ^aketh all metalles
soft. idem T^ seperat gold from copper. idem Another way. idem A powder to
seperat gold. idem To wash gold from copper. fol. 70 To get together the
gold out of thredes of. c. idem To gilde so that it shall not out with no water y^
is. idem To gather together into one, the gold that is scraped of from letters
and images. idem To take gilt from a cup that is gilded within. idem To make
gold soft after the melting. idem For to give a colour to the gold that it
shall be soft. i'd To boyle gold or silver to make it receive a. c. fol. 71 To
give a colour to gold. idem To give ^ idem For to make ^e. idem To make silver
fair and white. idem To know if ye silver have any gold in it or no. idem To
mortify and allay Mercury or quick silver. idem To gilt steel or iron. idem To
seperat gold or silver from metal or iron. fol. 72 Silver of tyn, to make
vessel or other things. idem To white any vessel of copper within and
without with silver colour very easily. idem To make vessel of Copper white
like Silver, both within and without. idem To make that tynne crack not.
idem To take Salamanders, for to occupy or to serve a mans turn. fol. 73 To
fine gold with Salamanders. idem The mother of all waters for to make all
metalles liquisyable. idem To prepare common salt. idem To prepare salt
Armoniacke. fol. 74 To make sal Alkali. idem To make sal Boras. idem Water of
Mercury. fol. 75 Water of salt Armoniacke. idem A water called aqua lactis
virginis. idem Water of salt Alkali. idem A water called aqua croci martis.
idem To calcine tartre. idem ^ egg shells. fol. ^ To ^csne or ^rne tutia.
idem A water called aqua lunaris. idem Aqua ^sata* idem A water called aqua
causc^c^ fol. 77 Aqua auri pigmenti. idem Water of common salt prepared. idem
Water of yelkes of eggs. idem Oyl^ ^ t^e. idem An oil called oleum la^e^n^ or
petroleum. idem Oleum benedictum. idem Oy^e of Brymstone. idem A note* 78 To
purge Brymstone. idem To sublime Brymstone* idem Oil of Eggs. fol. 79 Oleum
auri pigment^. idem Oleum lunare. idem Oil of Brymstone. idem To sublime
Mercury. idem
^ of Secrete^ and sovereign ^e^ good and approved Authors, ^ the French
tongue, and now lately ^gly she (to the profit of this ^) by W. Ward.
^ Prynted at London by Rouland Hall dwel^n^ ^ ^, at the sign of the hale Egle
and the Keep.

1562.


