THE CASTLE OF HEALTH GATHERED AND MADE BY SIR THOmas Elyot knight, out of the
chief Authors of Physyke, whereby every manne may know the state of his own
body, the preseruatio of health, and how to instruct well his physytion in
syckenes that he be not deceived.

1534

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS LORD CRVMVVELL LORD PRIVY SEAL Thomas Elyot
knight wishes lunge life in honour.
HE GIVES twice that gives quyckly (saith Senek.) Bis dat qui cito dat.
The grief, which I had for your lordshyps disease, with the desire that ye
mought live lunge with out syckenes, caused such speed in building the
Castle of helthe, that therein lacked some part of perfection, but yet the
promptness in gyuyng that thing, which I thought necessary, to declare mine
affection, I doubt not, was no lass esteemed of your good lordship, tha before
is rehearsed. Not withstanding, when I had eftesones pervsed that little
fortress, and found here and there some thing that lacked, I toke my pen
in the stead of a truelle, and amended the faults, and added somewhat more,
where I thought it convenient: And yet perchance some things mought happen to
escape, which were as needful to be corrected: mine attendence on the
parlyament, I being a member of the lower house, withdrawing from me leisure
conuenyente, to find in this warke all the faults, whithe moughte be amended.
May (...) now like your good lordshyppe to take in good part, not eftesones
the cas^lle, which I all re^ye have given you, but my good will and dylygente
in amendynge or repayrynge the same, which is also prynted in a much better
letter, considering that I no lass do behold you cotynually with mine eye of
remembrance, than they, which at dinner and supper do daily loke on you, the
cause I will not repeat for suspicion of flattery. Frendeshyp (as men say)
shulde be requyted, but yet crave I none other thing, but only equal
benevolence, and faith without any suspicion: whereunto actual demonstration
is so much requisite, that without if they both, seem to be drowned, sens
among us that be mortal, things are most judged by outward tokens. And yet
also in them men be sometime deceived, Hypocr^y having in this world so
great a preemynence: but in amity is one rule, which seldom fails. He that
lives moderately, doth love always faithfully: for over him affections and
passions have left authority: and he that stands just in the myddell,
stands most surely. Also in the world there is no more folly, than to these
friends of them, which do follow Fortune, like as swyne do follow the maiden,
which bears on her heed a payle full of milk. And if the payle fall, or
happen to be empty, they will follow no longer. The moderate person, where
both authority and virtue be in his friend equell, because that virtue was
the only cause of his love, that remaining, his mind is in such wise thereunto
joined, that although authorytie happen to slyppe, yet that love and virtue
may never be severed. I have spoken of frendeshyppe perchance more than
needs, but who will not wysshe, (if it moughte happen) to have such a
treasour, as neither the mountains of Ethiope, nor the ryuers of Inde do
conteyne in them, to be thereto compared. Callimachus an ancient poet saith,
Puissance is dredefull: Rychesse is honourable: but love for surety is most
incomparable, who perceives herein more than your good lordshyppe, which
besides the aboundaunte knowledge of hystoryes and natural wit, also
concerning this matter in your own sondry experiences, I dare say without
flattery, are equalle to any noble man living. Yet this my lunge tale is not
superfluous, which is told not to teach you, but only to renew your
lordeshyppes remembrance, which is not always present, specially where the
brain is choked with worldely matters of weyghtye importance. In such as I
am, having little and little to do, remembrance stands more at liberty,
and therefore we may more often think on that, which we have both herd and
scene, and in chesyng friends, be the more circumspect. But lest I shall make
the name of frendshyppe ^edyouse, by often rehersalle, I now conclude, that I
leave this lyttelle warke a monument of the lunge contynewed affection by me
borne toward your lordeshyppe, and a perpetual wytnesse, that I have deserved
so much of your favour, as in mutual frendshyppe is of rayson required;
which may be as easily payed, as it is granted, if in place, where it
ought to be showed, ye do not forget it. In the mean time I shall pray to
God to add to your good fortune and health, continuance with his grace and
favour wherein only is most perfect suertye.

THE TABLE
IT MUST BE remembered, that the noumber in the Table, doth sygnifye the leaf,
and the letter A, doth sygnifie the first page or side, the letter B, the
second page or side.

A
Annexed to things natural. fol. 1. a. Ages. fo. 10. b. (...). 40. b Air.
fol. 12 a Appuls. fol. 21. a Almondes. fo. 22. b Anyse sede. fo. 25. b Ale.
fol. 36. b Abstinence. fo. 55. b Affects of the mind. folio. 64. a
B
Blood. fol. 8. a Beetes. fo. 24. b Birds. 30. a Brain exceedynge in heate.
fol. 3. b Brayn^ exceedynge in cold. ibidem. Brain moist. ibid. Brain dry.
4. a Brayn hot moist. ibi. Brayn hot dry. ibid. Brain cold moist. 4 b Brayn
cold dry. ibid. Beans. 25. b Breakfast. 43. a Blood suckers. 63. a Bourage.
27. a Breadde. 28. b Black bird. 30. b Bustarde. 31. a Byttour. ibid. Brayn
of bestis. 32. a Butter. fo. 33. a Bie^e. fo. 36. b
C
COnsyderations of things belonging to health. 1. a Complexion of ma. 2. a
Colerike body. 2. b Coler. fo. 8. b Coler natural. fol. 9. a Coler unnatural.
ibid. Colour. fo. 11. a Colour of hear. 11. b Custom. 17. b Cucumbers. 19. b
Cherics. 21. a Chastnartes. 22. b Capers. 23. a Colewortes and cabages. fol.
23. b Cyhorye. 24. a Cheruyle. 25. a Considerations in abstynence. 55. b
Cloves. 28. b C^nyc. 29. b Capons, hens, and chyckens. 30. a Crane. 31. a
Chese. 33. a Cider. 36. b Confortaryues of the heart. 69. a Cruditit. 75. b
D
DAtes. fol. 20. a Dueke. 31. a Dyuersytie of meates. 44. a Dygestiues of
choler. folio. 59. b Dygestiues of fleume. folio. 60. a Domynyon of condry
complexions. 70. a Diet of sanguine persons. 72. b Dtete of choleric per
sons. ibid. Dyete of fleuinatycks persons. 73. b Dyete of melancolyke
persons. 74. a Dyete of them, which be ready to fall into syckenes. 78. b
Diet in time of pestilence. 89. a Drink between meals. 43. b Drink at
meals. 46. b Dygested. 55. a
E
Elements, fol. 1. b Endyue. 24. b Eggs. 33. a Exercise. 48. a. (...). 50. a
Evacuation. 54. b Exetementes. ibidm.
F
FLematih body. 2. b Fleume. 8. a Fleme natural. ib. Fleme unnatural. 8. b
Fruits. 19. a Figs. 20. a Fenell. 25. b Fylberdes. 22. a Flesh. 29. a
Fesaunt. 30. b Fete of beasts. 32. b Fylhe. ibidem. Frytasyes or rubbynges.
folio, 49. a
G
GEnytours hot. folio 7. a Genytors cold. ibidem. Genitours moist. ibid.
Genytours dry. ibide. Genytours hot and moyste. 7. b Genytours hot and
dry. ibide. Genytours cold and moist. ibidem. Genytoures cold and dry.
ibidem. Gourdes. 19. a Grapes. 20. b Garlyke. 26. b Gynger. 28. a Goose. 31. a
Gysar of birds. 31. b Gestation. 51. b
H
Heart hot distempered. 4. b Heart cold dystempered. 5. a Heart moyste
dystempered. ibidem Heart dry dystempered. ibidem. Hart hot moist. ibid. Hart
hot and dry. 5. b Hart cold moist. ibid. Hart cold and dry. ibi. Humours. 8. a
Herbs used in potage or to eat. 23. b Hate. 29. b Hearon. 31. a Hart of
beastis. 32. a Heed of beastis. ibid. Honey. 37. b Hemorroides or piles. folio.
63. b Heatnes or sorrow. 66. a
I
Icope. 27. a Joye. 69. b
K
kydde. 29. b
L
LJuer in heate distempred. 6. a Liver cold dystempered. ibidem. Liver moyste
dystempered. ibidem. Liver dry dystempered. ibidem. Letyse. 23. b. Lekes. 27.
a Lamb. 29. a Lark. 30. b Livers of birds and beasts 31. b Lunges of
beasts. ibi. Letting of blood. 61. a Leaches or bloods suckers. 63. a
Lassitude. fo. 77. a and 78. a
M
MElancolike body. fol 3. a Melacoly. 9. a Members instrumental. fol. 9 b
Meat and drink. 12. b Meates making good juice. ibidem. Meates making ylle
juice. 13. a Meates making choler. fol 13. b Meates making fleme ibidem. Meates
ingendrynge melancholy. 14 a Meates making thick juice. ibid. Meates hurtynge
the teethe. 14. b Meates hurtynge the even. ibidem. Meates making oppilations.
15. a Meates wyndy. ibid. Melons. 19. b Medlars. 22. a Malowes. 24. b Mutton.
29. b Moderacyon in Dyete. 42. a Meals. 42 b Maces. 28. b Members of birds.
folio. 31. b Melt or spleen. 32. a Marowe. ibid. Milk. 35. b
N
Nutmygges. 28. b.
O
OFfycyall members. 9 b Operatios. 10. b Olyues. 22. a Orenges. ibid. Onyons.
26. b Order in eating and drinking. 45. b Opilations what they are. fol. 41.
a Old men. 41. b Ordure. 55. a
P
PRyncypall members. fo. 9. b Parts similares. ibid. Powers natural. 10. a
Powers spiritual. ibi. Powers animal. ibid. Peaches. 21. a Pears. 22. a
Pourselan. 25. a Persely. ibide. Purgers of coler. 59. b Pourgers of flewme.
folio. 60. a Purgers of melancholy. fol. 60. b Precepts of Diocles folio. 75.
b Pomegranates. 21. b Prunes. 22. b Peason. fo. 25. b Parsnepes. 26. a
Penyryall. 27. b Pepper. 28. a Partryche. 30. b Plouer. ibidem. Pygeons. 31. a
Purgations by siege. 57. b. and. 58. a Precyse dyete. 47. a
Q
QVantytie of meat. 16. a Qualytie of meat. fo. 17. a and. 18. b Quynce. 21.
b Quail. 30. b
R
RAysons. 20. b Rapes. 26. b Radysshe. 26. a Rokat. 27. b Rosemary. ibid.
Repletion. 53. b
S
SAnguine body. 2. a Stomach hot. 6. b Stomach cold. ib. Stomach moist. ibide.
Stomach dry. 7. a Spirit natural. 10. b Spirit ^ttali. ibidem. Spirit
animal. ibide. Sorrel. 25. a Sauge. 27. a Stomach in the which mete is
corrupted. 88. a Sleep watch. 47. a Sauerye. 26 b Saffron. 28. b Swynes
flesh. 29. a Sparrows. 30. b Shoueler. 30. a Supper. 43. a Sugar. 38. b
Scarifieng. 62. b Sycknesses appropryed to sondrye seasons and ages. 79 a
Significations of sickenesses. 80. b
T
Things Natural. fo. 1. a Things not natural. ibidem. Things against
nature. ibide. Things good for the heed. 15. b Things good for the heart.
ibidem. Things good for the iyuer. ibidem. Things good for the lunges. ibid.
Things good for the ties. 16. a Things good for the stomach. ibid.
Temperature of meates. 17. b Turnippes. 26. a Time. 27. b Townesresses. ibid.
Trypes. 31. b Tongue of beastis. 32. a Time. 39. a. (...). 40. a Times appropryed
to ^uery humour. 71. a
V
VV^ildes. 12. a walnuts. 22. a Veale. 29. b Venyson. ibid. woodcockes. 31. a
Vdder. 32. a water. 33. b wine. fo 34. b wuaye. 36. b Vociferation. 52. b
Vomyte. 56. b Vrines. 84. a Virtue of meates. 88. a
Thus ends the Table.


THE FIRST BOOK.
TO THE CONSERVAtion of the body of mankynde, within the limitation of health,
which (as Galene saith) is the Detuenda sanitate lib. 1.
state of the body, wherein we be neither grieved with peyne, nor let from
doyng our necessary busynesse, doth belong the dylygent consyderation of three
sorts of things, that is to say,

Things Natural, Things not natural, and Things against nature.
Things Natural be.vii. in number.

Elements Complexions. Humours. Members. Powers. Operations and Spirits.
These be necessary to the being of helthe, according to the order of their
kind: and be always in the natural body.

Things not natural be six in number.

Air Meat and drink. Sleep and watch. Meuyng and rest. Emptynesse and
repletion and Affections of the mind.
Things against Nature be three.

Syckenesse. Cause of syckenesse. Iccident, which follows syckenes.
Annered to things natural.

Age. Colour. Figure, and Diversity of kinds.
The elements be those original things un myrt and vncompounde, of whose
temperance and myxture all other things, having corporal substance, be
compact: Of them be four, that is to say,

Earth. Water. Air and Fire.
Earth is the most gross and pondercuse element, and of her proper nature is
cold and dry.

Water, is more subtle and lyghte than earth, but in respect of Air and
Fire, it is gross and heavy, and of hit proper nature is cold and moyste.

Air, is more light and subtylle than the other two, and being not altered
with any exterior cause, is properly hot and moyste.

Fire, is absolutely lyghte and clear, and is the clarifier of other elements,
if they be vyci^te o^ out of their natural temperance, and is properly hot
and dry.

This to be remembered, that none of the said elements be commonly ^ene or
felt of mortal men, as they are in their original being: but they, which
by our senses be perceived, be corrupted with mutual mixture, and be rather
erthy, watery, airy, and fyry, than absolutely earth, water, air, and fire.

Of the complexion of Man. Cap. 2.
COmplexion is a combynation of two divers qualities of the four elements in
one body, as hot dry of the Fire: hot and moyste of the Air, cold and
moyste of the Water, cold and dry of the Earth. But although all these
complexions be assembled in every body of man and woman, yet the body takes
his denomination of those qualities, which abound in him, more than in the
other, as hereafter inseweth,

The body, where heate and moisture have sovereignty, is called Sanguine,
wherein the air hath preeminence, and it is perceived and known by these
signs, which do follow,

Sanguine Carnosite or fleshynesse. The veins and arteries large. Hear
plenty and red The visage white and ruddy. Sleep much. Dreams of bloody
things or things pleasant. Pulse great and full. Digestyon perfect. Angry
shortly. Siege, vryne, sweat abundant. Falling shortly into bledynge. The
urine red and gross.

Where cold with moisture prevails, that body is called Fleumatike, wherein
water hath preeminence, and is perceived by these signs.

Fleumatike. Fatness, quauyng and soft. Veins narow. Hear much and plain.
Colour white. Sleep superfluous. Dremes of things watery or of fysshe.
Slowness. Dullness in learning. Cowardyse. Bustle slow and little. Dygestyon
weak. Spyttell white, abundant, and thycke. Urine gross, white and pale.

Colerike is hot and dry, in whom the fire hath preeminence, and is discerned
by these signs following.

Choleric Leanes of body. Costyfenesse. Hear black or dark aburn curlyd.
Visage and skyn red as fire, or salowe. Hot things noyfull to him. Little
sleep. Dremes of fire, fighting or anger. Wit sharpe and quycke. Hardy and
fighting. Pulse swyfte and strong. Urine high coloured clear. Voice sharpe.

Melancolyke is cold and dry, over whom the earth has dominion, and is
perceived by these signs.

Melancolyke. Leanness with hardness of skin. Hear plain and thynne. Colour
duskyshe, or white with ^nnesse. ^e watch ^es fearful. (...) in opinyons.
Digestion slow and ill. Timorous and fearful. Anger lunge and frettynge.
Pulse little. Seldom laughing. Urine watery and thynne.

BEsides the said complexions of all the hole body, there be in the
particular members, complexions, wherein if there be any distemperaunce, it
brings syckenesse or grief into the member. Wherefore to know the
distemperature, these signs following wold be considered. Foresene, that it be
remembered, that some distemperatures be simple and sum be compound. They
which be simple, be in simple qualities, as in heate, cold, moyste, or dry.
They which be compound, are in compound or myxt qualities: as heate and
moisture, heate and drythe: cold and moyste, cold and dry. But now first
we will speak of the simple complexions, of every principal member, beginning
at the brain.

The brain exceeding in heate hath, The head and visage very red and hot.
The hear growing fast black and courlyd. The veins in the even apparent.
Superfluo{us} matter in the nosethryls, eien, ears. The heed annoyed with
hot meates, drynkes, and savours. Sleep short not sound.

The brain exceeding in cold hath, Much superfluite runnynge out of the
nose, mouth, ears and even. Hear straight fine growing slowly, flaxen. The
headde disposyd by small occasyon to poses and murres. It is soon annoyed with
cold. It is cold in touching. Veins of the even not seen. Sleapy somewhat.

Moist in excess hath, Hears plain. Seldom or never bald. Wit dull.
Much superfluities. Sleep much and deep.

The brayn dry hath No su{per}fluites running. Wits good and ready.
Watchefull. Hears black hard and fast growing. Bald shortly.

Complexions compouned.
Brain hot moist dystempered hath, The heed akyng heavy. Full of superfluines
in the nose. The southen wind greuouse. The Northern wind wholesome. Sleep
deep but unquiet with oft wakinges strange dreams. The senses and wit
vnperfecte.

Brain hot and dry dystempered hath, None abundance of superfluities, which
may be expelled. Senses perfect. Much watch. Sooner bald than other. Much
hear in childhod and black or browne, and courlyd. The heed hot and ruddy

Brain cold moist Dystempered hath, The senses and wit dull Much sleep. The
heed soon replenisshed with superfluous moisture. Distyllations and poses or
m^. Not (...) ^alde. Soon (...) with cold.

Brayn cold and dry dyssempered hath, The heed cold in feeling and without
colour. The veins not apering. Soon hurt with cold. Often diserased. wit
perfect in chyldehode, but in age dull. Aged shortly and bald.

Of the heart.
The hart hot distempered hath Much blowing puffing. Pulse swyfte and busy.
Hardiness mahode much. Promptness activity and quyckenesse in doing of things.
Fury and boldness. The breast heary toward the left side. The breast broad
with the heed little. The body hot, except the liver do let it.

The hart cold distempered hath, The pulse very little. The breath little and
slow. The breast narow. The body all cold, except the liver doth inflame it.
Fearfulnes, Scrupulosite, much care Curiosity. Slowness in acts. The breast
clean without hears.

The hart moist distempered hath. The pulse soft. Soon agry soon pacified The
body al moist, except the liver disposith contrary.

The hart dry distempered hath The pulse harde. Not lightly angry, but being
angry, not soon pacyfied. The body dry, except the li uer doth dispose
contrary.

The heart hot and ^oyst The breast stomach heary Promptness in acts. Soon
a^gry. Fiersnes but not so much as in hot and dry. Pulse soft, swift, busy.
Breath or wind according. Shortly falls into diseases caused of putryfaction.


The heart hot and dry. The heart poulse great and swyfte. The breath or
wind according. The breast and stomach all heary. Quick in his doings.
Boldness and hardynesse. Swift hasty in moving Soon styr^ed to anger ryrannous
in manners. The breast broad and all the body hot dry.

The heart cold and moyste The pulse soft. Fearful and timorous. Slow. The
breast clean without hear. Not hastily anger nor refaynynge anger. The breast
narowe. All the body cold moist

The heart cold and dry hath, The pulse hard little. The wind moderate.
Seldom angry, but when it happens, it dureth long The breast clean without
hear and little. All the body cold dry.

Of the liver.
The liver in heate distempered hath. The veins great. The blood more hot
than temperate. The bealy heary. All the body hot exceeding temperance.

The liver cold distempered hath The veins small. Abundance of fleum^ The
blood cold. All the body cold in feelynge. The bealy without hear.

The liver moyste distempered hath The veins soft. Much blood and thynne. All
the body moyste in feeling, except the heart disposes it contrary.

The liver dry distempered hath The veins harde. The blood little and
thycke. All the body dry.

The complexions compound, may be decer Galenus in art parua. lib. 2.
ned by the said simple qualities. And here is to be noted, that the heate of
the heart may vanquyshe the cold in the liver. For heate is in the heart, as
in the fountain or spring, and in the Liver, as in the River.

Of the stomach.
The stomach hot distempered. He digests well, specyally harde meates, that
will not be shortly altered. Light mentes and soon altered, be therein
corrupted. The appetite little and slow. He delyteth in Meates and drinks,
which be hot for every natural complexio delyteth in his semblable.

The stomach cold dystempered. He hath good appetite. He digests ylle and
slowly, specyally gross meates and harde. Cold meates do wax sour, being
in him vndygested. He delytethe in meates and drynkes, which be Cold, and yet
of them he is indamaged.

The stomach moist dystempered He thyrsteth but seldom, yet he desires to
drink. with superfluous drink^ he is hurt. He delyteth in moyste meates.

The stomach dry dystempered He is soon thyrsty. Content with a lyttelle
drink. Diseased with much drink. He deliteth in dry meates

It is to be noted, that the dyspositions of Galenus in art parua.
the stomach natural, do desire that which is of like qualities. The
dispositions unnatural, do desire things of contrary qualities.

Also not the stomach only causes a man to thyrste or not thyrste, but also
the liver, the lunges, and the heart.

Of the genitories or stones of generation.
The genytories hot distempred Great appetite to the act of generation.
Ingendrynge men children. Hear soon grown about the members.

The genytories cold distempred Small appetite to the act of generation.
Ingendryng women chyldre. Slow growth of hear about the members.

The genitories moist distempred Sede abundant but thynne and watery.
The genitoryes dry distempred Sede little but meetly thick in substance.
Genytories hot and moyste Lass appetite to lechery than in them, which be
hot and dry. More puissance to do it, and without lass damage. Hurt by
absteynyng fro it. Less herines tha in hot dry.

The genytories hot and dry The sede thycke. Much fruitefulnesse of
Generation. Great appetite and redynesse to the act. Hear about the members
soon grown. Swyftenesse in spedynge o^ the act. Soon therewith satisfied.
Damage by using thereof.

The genytories cold and moist The sede watery and thynne. Little desire to
the act, but more puissance than in them which be cold and dry. Little
hears or none about the members.

The genytories cold and dry Hears none or few. Little apetit or none to
lecher^ Little puissance to do it. Ingendrynge more females than men chyldern.
That little sede that is, is thikker than in cold and moist.

Of humours.
IN the body of Man be four pryncipal humours, which continuynge in the
proporcion, that nature hath lymitted, the body is free frome all syckenesse.
Contrary wise by the increase or diminution of any of them in quantity or
quality, over or under their natural assignement, inequall temperature
comes into the body, which sickness follows more or lass, according to
the lapse or decay of the temperatures of the said humours, which (...) these
following.

Blood, Fleume, Choler, Melancholy
Blood hath preeminence over all other humours in susteynynge of all living
creatures, for it hath more conformity with the originalle cause of living,
by reason of temperatenes i^ heate and moisture, also nouryssheth more the
body, and restores that which is decayed, being the very treasure of life, by
loss whereof, death immedyately follows. The distemperature of blood happens
by one of the other three humours, by the inordinate or su{per}fluous mixture of
them.

Of fleume.
Fleume is of two sorts,

Natural and Unnatural.
Natural fleume is a humour cold moist, white and sweet, or without taste
engendered by insufficient decoction in the second digestion of the watery or
raw parts of the matter decocte called Chilus, by the last digestyon made apt
to be converted into blood. In this humour, water hath dominion most
princypall.

Fleume unnatural is that, which is myxte with other humours, or is altered
in his quality. And thereof is.viii. sondry kinds

Fleume. watery, which is founden in spettil of great drinkers, or of them,
which dygeste ylle. Slymy or raw. Glasy, like to white glass, thick,
viscouse like bird lyme and heavy. Plastry, which is very gross, and as it
were chalky, such is found in the joints of theyin, which have the gowte.
Salt, which is mingled with coler. Sower, myxt with melancholy, which comes of
corrupt digestion. Harsh, thycke and gross, which is seldom founden, which
tastes like grene crabs or sloes. ^o^ticum.
Stiptik or binding, is not so gross nor cold, as harsh, hath the taste like
to green red wine, or other like, straynynge the tu^ge.

Choler doth participate with natural heate as lunge as it is in good
temperance. And thereof is also two kinds,

Natural and Unnatural.
Choler natural. Natural choler is the some of blood, the colour whereof is
red and clear, or more like to an orange colour, and is hot and dry, wherein
the fire hath dominion, is light and sharpe, and is engendered of the most
subtle part of matter decocte, or boiled in the stomach, whose be gynnynge is
in the liver.
Unnatural choler is that which is myxte o^ corrupted with other humours,
whereof be four kinds,

Citrine or yelowe choler, which is of the myxture of natural choler, and
watery fleume, and therefore hath less heat then pure choler. Yelky, like to
yelkes of eggs, which is of the myxture of fleume congeled, and choler
natural, is yet lass hot than the other. Grene like to lekes, whose
beginning is rather of the stomach, tha of the liver Grene like to grene canker
of mettle, and bourneth like venym, and is of excedynge adustion of choler or
fleume, by these two kinds nature is mortified.
Melancholy or black coler is divided into two kinds.

Natural, which is the dregs of pure blood, and is known by the blaknes,
when it issues either downward or upward, and is verily cold and dry.
Vnnaturalle, which proceeds of the adustion of choleric myxture, and is
ho^ter lyg^ter, having in it violence to kill, with a dangerous disposytion.
(...) the members.
There be diversities of members, that is to say.

Principal members. The brain. Th heart. The liver. The stones of generatio

Official members. Syn^wes which do serve to the brain. Arteries or pulses,
which do serve to the heart. Vayn^s which do serve to the lyuc^. Vessels
spermatik, where in mans sede lies, which do serve to the s^on^

Parts called Similares, for being divided they remain in them self like as
they were. Bones. Gristell. Calls betwirte the vttermooste skin and the
flesh. Muskles or fylettes. Fat Fles she.

Members instrumental. The stomach. The raynes. The bowels. All the great
synewes.

Those of their virtue do appetite meat alter it.

O^ powers
Animal. Spiri^uall, Natural.
Natural power which do minister. To whom is ministered.

Which doth mynyster. Appetiteth, Retains, Digests. Expels.

To whom is mynystred, Engenders, Nourysheth, Fedeth,

Power spiritual Warkyng, which delateth the heart and art^es, and ^ftesones
strayneth them. Wrought, which is sty^red by an exterior cause to wark whereof
comes anger, indygnation, subtility, and care.

Power animal. That which ordeyneth, discerns, and composet^. That moves
by voluntary motion. That which is called sensyble, whereof do proceed the
five wits.

Of that which ordeineth do {pro}cede Imagination in the forhed. Reason in the
brain. Remembrance in the nodel.

Operations. Appetite by heate and drythe. Digestio by hete moisture. Retaining
by cold drythe. Expulsio by cold moysre.

Spirit is an airy substance subtle, styryng the powers of the body to
perform their opera^ions, which is dyuyded into

Naturalle, which takes his beginning of the liver, and by the veins which
have no pulse, spredeth into all the hole body. ^all which proceeds from the
hart, and by the arteries or pulses is sent into all the body. Animalle, which
is engendered in the brain, and is sent by the senewes throughout the body,
makes sense or feelyng^.
Annexed to things natural.
(...) be. ^ii^. Adolescencye to.xxv. years, hot and moyste, in the which
time the body grows. Juuentute unto.xl. years, hot and dry, wherein the body
is in perfyte growth. Senectute, unto.lx. years cold dry, wherein the body
begins to decreace, Age decrepit, until the last time of life, accidentally
moyste, but naturally cold and dry, wherein the pdwers and strength of the
body be more and more mynished.

Colour.
Of inward causes. Of outward causes.
Colour of inward causes Of equality of humours, as he that is red and
white. Of inequality of humours, whereof do proceed, black, salowe, paale,
or white only. Red, Black, do betoben dominio of heate.
Salowe, White, cold of fl^. Pale, cold of melancholy. Red abundance of
blood. Salow, chole^ citrine. Blarke, melancholy or choler aduste.

Colour of outward causes. Of cold or heate, as english men be white,
Moriens (...) black. Of things accidentalle, as of fear, of anger, of
sorrow, or other like mocion^.

Colour of hear Black, either of abundance of choler inflamed, or of much
intending or abus^yon of blood. Red hear of much heate not a^ust^. Gray
hears of abundance of melanch^. ^te hears of the lack of natural hear, by
occasyon of fleume pu^fyed.

All the resydue concerning things natural (...) in the Introduction of
Joan^icius, and in the little craft of Galene, I purposely (...) over for
this time, forasmoche as it doth requy^ a r^der having some knowledge in
philo^ophye natural, or ^s is (...) to harde and t^dious to be vnd^stande.
Moreover this, which I (...) in this first tables, shall be sufficient, to
the conservation of he^the, I mean, with that which now follows in the
other Tables.

The second Table.
Things not natural be so called, because they be no por^yon of a natural
body, as they be, w^iche be called natural things, but yet by the temperance
of them the body being in helthe, so consists by the dis^emp^tance of them,
syckenesse is induced, the body dessolued.

The first of things not natural is air, which is proprely of it self, or
of some material cause or occasion good or ill.

That which is of it self good, hath pure va ^ours, and is o^oriferous.

Also it is of it self, swyft in alteration from hot to cold, wherein the
body is not much provoked to sweat for heate, no to chylle for vehemence of
cold.

Air among al things not natural is chiefly to be observed, forasmoch as it
doth both enclose us, also enter into our bodies, specially the most noble
member, which is the hart, we can not be separate one howre frome it, for the
necessity of breathing and fetching of wind,

The causes whereby the air is corrupted be specyally four.

Influeces of sondry sterres. Great standing waters never r^freshed. ^arayne
lyenge lunge above ground. Much people in small ^ome living vnclenly and
slutty shely.
wyndes brynging holsom air. North, which prolongs life by expoulsynge
ylle vapours. East is temperate and lusty.

wyndes brynging ylle air. South corrupts, and makes ylle vapours. West,
is very mutable, which nature doth hate.

Meat and dryn^e.
^ and drink we must consider syxt things,

Substance. Quantity. Quality. Custom. Time. Order.
(...) Substance, some is good, which makes good (...), and good blood, some
is ylle, and ^gendi^th ylle juice and ylle blood.

Meates and drynkes making good ^ce.
Bread of pure flower, of good whet somewhat leuened, well baked, not to old
nor to stale. Eggs of fesauntes, hens, or patryches new laid, poched, mean
between rear and harde. Milk new mylked, drunk fasting, Wherein is sugar, or
the leues of mintes. Fesauntes. Pairiches or chykens. Capons or hens. Birds
of the feldes. Fyshe of stony ryuers. Veale suckynge. Pork yonge. Beef not
passing.iii. years. Pygeons. Venyson of red dere. Peas potage with myntes.
Fate of swyne or calves. Figs ripe, before meals.
Raysons, Borage. Languedebiefe. Persely. Myntes. Rice with almonde myshe.
Letyse. Cykorye. Grapes ripe. Wynes good moderately take, well fined. Ale and
bier six days old, clean brewed, and not strong. Mirth and gladness.
The liver and brains of hens and chykens, and yonge geese.
Meates and drynkes making ylle juice.
Old beef. Old mutton. Geese old. Swan old. Duekes of the kanell.
Inward of beasts. Black puddynges. The hart liver kydneys of all bestes. The
brains mary of the backbone. Wodde cul^ers. Shell fyshe, except creuyse
deaudoulce Chese harde. Apples and pears much used. Figs and grapes not
ripe. All raw herbs, except letyse, borage, and cykorie. Onyons, Garlyke,
immoderatelye used, specyally in Choleric stomachs.
Leekes. Wine in must or sour. Fear, sorrow, and pensyfenesst.
Meates ingendrynge choler.
Garlyke. Onyons. Rokat, Kersis, Lekes, Mustard, Pepper, Houye, Wine much
Drunken. Sweet meates.
Meates ingendrynge fleume.
All slymy and deauynge meates. Chese new. All fysh, specially in a flematike
stoma^ Inwards of beasts. Lambs flesh. The synewe parts of flesh.
Skynnes. Brains. Lunges. Rapes. Cucumbers. Replecion, Lack of exercis^
Meates ingendrynge melancholy.
Beef, Gotes flesh, Hares flesh, Bores flesh, Salt flesh, Salt fysshe,
Cole wortes, All pulse except white peason. Browne breadde course. Thycke
wine, Black wine, Old chese, Old flesh. Great fyshes of the see.
Meates making thick juice.
Rye breadde, Must. Bread without leven. Cake breadde. See fyshe great.
Shelle fyshe. Beef. The kydneys, The liver of a swyne, The stones of beasts.
Milk much soden. Rapes. All round roots, Cukumbers. Sweet wine. Deep red
wine. Garlyke, Mustard. Origanum. Hysope. Basylle. Fenell. Chese. Eggs fried
or harde. Cheste^ nuts. Nau^wes. Figs grene. Appulles not ripe. Pepper.
Rokat, much used. Leekes. much used. Oynyons much used.
Meates which do hurt the teeth.
Very hot meates. Nuts. Sweet meates and dryntkes. Rodysshe roots. Harde
meates. Milk. Bitter meates. Much vomyte. Leekes. Fyshe fat. Lymons.
Colewortes.
Meates Which do hurt the eyes.
^. Lechery. Must. All poulse. Sweet wynes and thycke wynes. Hemp sede. Very
salt meates. Garlyke. Oynyons. Colewortes. Radyshe. Reading after supper
immediately.
Making great oppilations.
Thycke milk. All sweet things. Rye breadde. Sweet wynes.
Meates inflatynge or Wyndy.
Beans. Lupynes. Cicer. Mill. Cucumbers. All juice of h^ Figs dry. Rapes.
Nauews raw. Milk. Honey not well clarified. Sweet wine. Must.
Things good for the heed
Cububes. Galyngale. Lignum alnes. Maioram. Balm myntes. Gladen. Nutmygges.
M^e. Rosemarye. Roses. Pionye. Hissope. Spyke. Camomyll, Mellylote. ^ewe.
^a^kyn^se.
Things good for the heart
Cyramome. Saffron. Coral. Cl^ues. Lignum aloes. Perles. Macis. Balm myntes.
Myrabolanes. Musk, Nutmigges. Rosemarye. The bone of the heart of a red
dere. Maioram. Buglosse. Borage. Setuall.
Things good for the liver
worm wode. With wind. Agrymonye. Saffron. Clones. Endyue. Liver wort.
Cyhorie. Plantayne. Dragons. Raysons great. Saunders. Fen^lle. Violetres. Rose
water. Letyse.
Things good for the lunges
Elycampane. Hysope. Scabiose. Lyko^. Raysons. Maydenheare. Penidies. Almondes.
Dates. Pistacis.
Things good for the eyes
Eyebryght. Fenyll. Veruyn. Roses. Celandyne. Agrymonye. Cloves. Cold water.
Things good for the stomach
Myrabolanes Nutmygges. Organum. Pystaces. Ouynces. Olybanum. Wormewode.
Saffron. Coral. Agrymonye. Funitorye. Galyngale. Cloves. Lignum aloes. Mastix.
Mynt. Spodium. The innermooste skyn of a hens gysar. Coriander prepared.
THE SECOND BOOK,
Of quantity. Cap. 1.
THE QVANTITIE of meat must be proporcioned after the substance and quality
thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eats First it ought to
be remembered, that meates hot and moyste, which are qualities of the blood,
are soon turned into blood, and therefore much nourysheth the body. Some
meates do nourish but little, having little conformity with blood in their
qualities. Of them, which do neryshe, some are more gross, some lighter in
digession. The gross meat engenders gross blood, but where it is well
concoct in the slomake, and well digested, it makes the flesh more firm,
and the official members more strong, than fine metes. wherefore of men,
which use much labour or exercise, also of them, which have very choleric
stomachs, whore in England, gross meates may be eaten in a great quantity: and
in a choleric stomach beef is better digested than a chykens leg,
forasmoche as in a ho^fe stomach fine meates be shortly aduste and corrupted.
Contrarywyse in a cold or fleumatike stomach gross meat abides lunge
vndigested, and makes putrified matter, light meates therefore be to such a
stomach more apt and convenient. The temperate body is best nourished with
a little quantity of gross meates: but of tempecate meates in substance and
quality, they may safely eat a good quantity. Foresene always, that they
eat without gourmandyse, or leave with some appetite. And here it wold be
remembered, that the choleric stomach, doth not desire so much as he may
digest, the melancholy stomach may not digest so much as he desires: for
cold makes appetite, but natural heate concocteth or boils. Not
withstanding unnatural or supernatural heate distroyeth appetite, and
corrupts digestion, as it appears in fevers. Moreover fruits and herbs,
specially raw, would be eaten in a small quantity, all though the person be
very choleric, forasmoch as they do engender thynne watery blood, apt to
receive putrefaction, which although it be not shortly perceived of him that
uses it, at length they feel it by sondry diseases, which are lunge in
coming, and shortly sleeth, or be hardly escaped. Fynallye excess of meates,
is to be abhorred. For as it is said in the book called Ecclesiasticus, In
much meat shall be sycknes, Ecclesiasti co. 37.
and inordinate appetite shall approach unto choler. Semblably the quantity of
drink wold be moderated, that it exceed not, nor be equalle unto the quantity
of meat, specially wine, which moderately taken, aydeth nature, and
comfort her, and as the said author of Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 31.
saith, wine is a reioycynge to the soul and body. And Theognes says in
Galenes Galen. de tuenda sa.
warke, A large draught of wine is ylle. A moderate draught is not only not
ylle, but also comodious or profitable.

Of quality of meates. Cap. 2.
QValitie is in the complexion, that is to say, it is the state thereof, as
Hot or cold, moyste or dry. Also some meates be in winter cold in act, and
in virtue hot. And it would be considered, that every coplexion temperate
intemperate, is coserued in his state, by that which is like thereto in form
and degree. But that which excedeth much in dystemperaunce, must be reduced
to his temperance, by that which is contrary to him in form or quality,
but like in degre moderately used. By form is understand grossenes,
fynenesse, thyckenesse, or thyckenesse, by degree, as the first, the second,
the third, the fourth, in heate c^de, moisture, or drythe.

Of Custom. Cap. 3.
CVstome in feeding is not to be contemned, or little regarded: for those
meates, to the which a ma^e hath ben of lunge time accustomed, though they be
not of substance commendable, yet do they sometime lass harm ^
than better metes, whereunto a man is not used. Also the meates and drynkes,
which do much del^te him that eats, or to be preferred before that, which
is better, but more unsavoury. But if the custom be so perniciouse, that it
needs ^
must be left, than would it be withdrawn by little and little in time of
helthe, and not of lyckenesse. For if it should be withdrawn in time of
syckenesse, Nature shulde sustain treble de^runent, first by the grefe induced
by sycknesse, second by receyuynge of medicines, thirdly by forbearing the
thing, wherein she delyteth.

Of the temperature of meates to be received. Cap 4.
TO kere the body in good temper: to them whose natural coplexion is moyste,
ought to be given meates that be most in virtue or power. Contrariwise to
them, whose naturalle complexion is dry? ought to be given meates dry in
virtue or power. To bodies intemperate, such meates or drinks are to be
given, which be in power contrary to the distemperance, but the degrees are
always to be considered, as well of the temperance of the body, as of the
meates. For where the meates do much exceed in degree the temperature of the
body, they annoy the body in causing distemperance, As hot wynes, pepper,
garlyke, onyons, salt, be noyfull to them, which be choleric, because they be
in the highest degre of heate and dries, above the just temperance of man
body in that coplexion. And yet be they oftentimes wholesome to them, which be
fleumatike. Contrary wise, cold water, cold herbs, and cold fruits
moderately used, be holsom to choleryke bodies, by putting away the heate,
exceeding the natural temperature: and to them, which be fleumatyke, they be
vnholsome, and do bring into them distemperance of cold and moyste.

What distemperance happens by the excess of sondry qualities in meates and
drynkes. Cap. 5.
Meates. Cold, do congele and mortify. Moyste, do putrefy and hasten age.
Dry, sucks up natural moisture. Clamy, stops the issue of vapors and
urine, and engenders tough fleume and gravel. Fat and oily, swymmeth lunge
in the stomach, and brings in lothsomnesse. Bitter, doth not nouryshe. Salt,
do fret much the stomach. Harrys she, like the taste of wild fruits, do
constipa^e, and restrayn. Sweet, chauffeth the blood, and causes opilations
or stoppynges of the pores and cundytes of the body. Sower cools nature, and
hastens age.

What commodity happens by the moderate use of the said qualities of meates
and drynkes. Cap. 6.
Meates Cold asswageth the bournynge of choler. Moyste, humecteth that which
is dried. Dry, consumes superfluouse moisture Clammye, thycketh that, which
is subtle and percynge. Bitter cleanses and wypeth of, also mollifies and
expels fleume. Salt, relents fleume clammy, and dries it. Fat and
vnctuouse, nourysheth, and makes soluble. Stiptike or rough on the toungue
vyndeth and comfort appetite. Sweet doth cleanse, dissolve, and nouryshe.

Of fruits. Cap. 7.
FOrasmoche as before that tyllage of corn was invented, and that deuouryng of
flesh and fyshe was of mankynde used, men undoubtedly lived by fruits, Nature
was therewith contented satisfied: but by change of the diet of our
progenitors, there is caused to be in our bodies such alteration from the
nature, which was in men at the beginning, that now all fruits generally are
noyfulle to man, and do engender ylle humours, and be oftetymes the cause of
putrified fevers, if they be much and continually eaten. Not withstanding
unto them, which have abundance of choler, they be sometime convenient, to
repress the flame which proceeds of choler. And sum fruits which be
styptike, or byndynge in taste, eaten before meals, do bind the bealy, but
eaten after meals, they be rather laxative. Now shall it not be vnexpedient,
to write of some fruits particularly, declarynge their noyefull qualities in
appayrynge of Nature, and howe they may be used with lest detriment.

Of Gourdes.
GOurdes raw be unpleasant in eating, Galen. de aliment. 2.
ill for the stomach, and almost never digested, therefore he that will needs
eat them must boyle them, toste them, or fry them, every way they be without
savour or taste, of their proper nature, they give to the body cold and moyste
nouryshement, and that very little, but by reason of the slyppernesse of
their substance, and because all meates, which be moyste of their nature, be
not byndynge, they lightly pass forth by the bealy. And being well ordered,
they will be meetly concocte, if corruption in the stomach do not prevent
them: they be cold and moyste in the second degree.

Of Melones and Pepones.
MElones and Pepones be almost of one kind but that the melone is round like
an apple, and the innermoste part thereof, where the seeds are contained, is
used to be eaten. The pepon is much greatter, and somewhat lunge, and the
inner part thereof is not to (...) eaten: They both are very cold and moist,
and do make ill ^yce in the body, if they be not well digested, but the pepon
much more than the melon. they do leest hurre, if they be eaten before
meals. All be it if they do find in the stomach fleume, they be turned into
fleume, if they find choler, they be turned into choler. Not withstanding
there is in them the virtue to cleanse and to provoke urine, they be cold and
moysie in the second degree.

Cucumbers.
CVcumbers do not exceed so much in moisture as melons: and therefore they be
not Galen. de alimor. 2.
so soon corrupted in the stomach: but in some stomachs, being moderatelye
used, they do digest well: but if they be abundantly eaten, or much used,
they engender a cold and thycke humour in the veins, which never or seldom
is turned into good blood, and sometime brings in fevers. Also they abate
carnal lust. The seeds as well thereof, as of melones and gourdes, being
dried, and made clean from the husks, are very medicinable against sycknesses
procedynge of heate, also the difficulty or let in pyssynge, they be cold
and moyste in the second degree.

Dates.
Be harde to dygeste, therefore being much eaten, and not well dygested, they
annoy the head, and cause gnawynge in the stomach, and make gross juice, and
sometime cause obstructions or stoppinges in the liver and spleen. And where
there is inflammation or hardness in the body, they are vnholsome, but being
well digested and temperately used, they nourysshe and make the flesh firm,
and also binds the bealy: old days be hot and dry in the first degree:
new gathered are hot and moist in the first degre.

Of figs.
Figs eaten, do shortly pass out of the stomach, and are soon distributed
into all the Actius. 1.
parts of the body, and have the power to cleanse, specially gravel, being
in the raynes of the back, but they make no substancial nourishment, but
rather somewhat louse and wyndye, but by their quycke passage, the wind is
soon dissolved. Therefore if they be ripe, they do leest harm of any fruits,
or almost none. Dry figs and old, are more hot and moyste than new
gathered, but being much eaten they make ill blood and juice, and as some do
suppose, do engender lice, and also annoys the liver and the splent, if they
be inflamed, but having the power to attenuate or make humours currant, they
make the body soluble, and do cleanse the raynes. Also being eaten before
dinner with ginger or pepper, or powder of time, or penyroyall, they profit
much to them, which have oppilations or hard congeled matter in the inner
parts of the body, or have distillations or reumes falling into the breast
and stomach. New figs are hot and moyste, old figs are hot in the
first degree, and dry in the second.

Of grapes and raysons.
GRapes do not nouryshe so much as figs, but being type, they make not much
Galen. de aliment. 2.
ill juice in the body: all be it newly gathered, they trouble the belly,
fylleth the stomach with wynd, therefore if they be hanged up a while, er they
be eaten, they are the lass noyfull. Sweet grapes, are hottest, and do louse
somewhat, and make a manne thyrstye, Sour grapes are cold, and do also louse,
but Diosco. 5.
they are harde of digestyon, and yet they do not nouryshe. They which are in
taste bitter or harryshe, be like to them that are sour. Raysons do make the
stomach firm and strong, and do provoke appetite, and do comfort weak bodies,
being eat before meals, they be hot in the first degre, and moist in second.

Of Cherries.
Cherries, if they be sweet, they do soon slyp down into the stomach, but if
they be sour or sharpe, they be more holsom, do louse, if they be eat fresh,
newly gathered, they be cold moist in the first degre.

Of peaches.
PEaches do lass harm, and do make better juice in the body, for they are
not so soon corrupted being eaten. Of the juice of them may be made a
syrope, very wholesome against the distemperauce of choler, whereof proceeds a
stynkynge breathe, they be cold in the first degree, and moyste in the
second.

Of appulles.
AL appulles eaten soon after that they be gathered, are cold, hard to
digest, and do make ill and corrupted blood, but being well kept until the
next winter, or the year following, eaten after meals, they are right holsom,
and do confyrme the stomach, and make good digestion, specially if they be
roasted or baken, most properly in a choleric stomach, they are best pserued
in honey, so that one touche not an other. The rough tasted apples are wholesome,
where the stomach is weak by dystemperaunce of heate or much moisture. The
bitter apples, where that grief is increaced. The sour appuls, where the
matter in congeled or made thycke with heate. In distemperature of heate and
dries by drinking much wine, they have ben found commodiouse: being eaten at
night, going to bed, without drinking to them, they be cold and moyste
in the first degre.

Of Quynces.
QVynces be cold and dry, eaten before meal, they bind restrain the stomach,
that it may not digest well the meat, except that they be roasted or sodden,
the core taken out and mixte with honey claryfyed, or sugar, than they cause
good appetite, and preserves the heed from drunkenness: taken after meat, it
closes and draws the stomach to gyther, and helps it to dygeste, and
mollifies the bealy, if it be aboundantely taken: they be cold in the first
degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profytable to the stomach, specially they,
which are sweet, but in a hot fever, they that are sour be more expedient
and wholesome. for than the sweet do intende heate, and puff up the stomach.

Of Pears.
Pears are much of the nature of apples, but they are heuyer, but taken after
meat roasted or baken, they are not vnholsome, and do restrain and knit the
stomach, being rype^ they be cold and moyste in the first degre.

Medlars.
MEdlars are cold and dry, and constrictiue or straynynge the stomach, and
therefore they may be eaten after meals, as a medicine, but not used as meat,
for they engender melancholy, they be cold and dry in the second degree.

Walnuts
VAlnuttes, if they be blaunched, are supposed to be good for the stomach,
somewhat lowsynge the bealy, myxte with sugar, they do nourysshe temperately. Of
two dry nuts, as many figs, and.xx. leaves of Few with a grain of salt,
is wade a medicine, whereof if one do eat fasting, nothing which is venomous
may that day hurt him, and it also preserves against the pestilence, and this
is the very right Mithridate. they be hot and dry in the second degree,
after some oppinions hot in the third degre, dry in the second.

Fylberdes and hasylnuttes.
They are more strong in substance than wall nuts, wherefore they are not so
easily or soon digested. Also they do inflate the stomach, and cause heed
ache, but they engender fat. And if they be roasted, they are good to
restrain rewmes. Also eaten with pepper, they are good against tourmentes of
the bealye, and the stoppynge of vryne. They be hot and dry in the first
degree.

Of Almondes
THey do extenuate and cleanse without any byndynge, wherefore they purge the
breast and lunges, specially bitter almondes. Also they do mollifye the bealy,
provoke sleep, and causes to pysse well, five or syx of them eaten before
meat, keep a manne from being drunk, they be hot and moist in the first
degre.

Of Chestyns
They being roasted under the ymbers or hot ashes, do nourysshe the body
strongely, and eaten with honey fasting, do help a manne of the cowghe.

Prunes
OF the gardeyne and type, do dispose a man to the stool, but they do bring
no manner of nouryshement. To this fruit like as to figs this property
romayneth, that being dried they do profit. The damas^e prune rather binds
than lowseth, and is more commodiouse unto the stomach they be cold and moyste
in the second degre.

Olyues
COndyte in salt lycoure, taken at the beginning of a meal doth corroborate
the stomach, stireth appetite, and louseth the bealy, being eaten with
vyneger. They which be ripe, are temperatly hot, they which be grene, are
cold and dry.

Of Capers
THey nouryshe nothing after that they be salted, but yet they make the belly
louse and purges fleume, which is therein contained. Galen. de alime. 2.
Also styrreth appetite to meat and opens the obstructions or stoppynge of
the liver and spleen, being eaten with oximell, before any other meat: they
be hot and dry in the second degree.

Orenges
The ryndes taken in a little quantity, do comfort the stomach, where it
digests, specially condite with sugar, and taken fasting in a small
quantity. The juice of orenges, having a toste of bred put unto it, with a
little powder of myntes, sugar, and a little cynamome, makes a very good
sauce to provoke appetite. The juice eaten with sugar in a hot fever, is not
to be discommended. The rynde is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second: the juice of them is cold in the second degree, and dry in the
first.

Herbs used in potage or to eat. Capitulo. 8.
GEnerally al herbs raw, and not sodden, do engender cold and watery juice, if
they be eaten customably, or in abundance: all be it some herbs are more
comestyble, do lass harm unto nature, and moderatelye used, makes inetely
good blood.

Lettyse.
Among all herbs, none hath so good juice as letise: for somemen do suppose,
that it makes abundance of blood, al be it not very pure or perfyte. It doth
set a hot stomach in a very good temper, makes good appetite, and eaten in
the euennynge, it provokes sleep, albe it, it neither doth louse nor bind the
bealye of his own property. It increases milk in a woman's breasts, but it
abates carnal appetite, and much vsynge thereof, hurts the eye syghte. It
is cold and moist temperatly

Colewortes and Cabages.
BEfore that avarice caused merchants to fetch out of the east and south
parts of the world, the traffyke of spyce and sondry droughes, to content
the vnsaciablenesse of wanton appetites, Colewortes for the virtues supposed to
be in them, were of such estimation, that they were judged to be a sufficient
medicine against all diseases, as it may appear in the book of wise Cato,
wherein he writes of husbandry. But now I will no more remember, than shall
be required, in that which shall be used as meat and not pure medicine. The
juice thereof has virtue to pourge: the hole leaves being half sodden, and
the water poured out, and they being put eftsoon into hot water, and sodden
until they be tender, so eaten they do bind the bealy. Some do suppose, if
they be eaten raw with vinegar, before meat, it shall preserve the stomach
from surfettynge, and the heed from drunkenness: all be it much vsynge of
them dulls the sight, except the eyes be very moist. Fynally the juice that
it makes in the body is not so commendable, as that which is engendered of
lettyse. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Of Cikorie or suckorie.
IT is like in operation to lettyse, tempers choler wonderfully, and therefore
in all choleric fevers, the decoctio of this herb or the water thereof
stylled, is right expedient. semblably the herb and rote boiled with flesh,
that is fresh being eaten, kepeth the stomach and head in very good temper. I
suppose that Southystell and Dentdelyon, be of like qualities, but not so
convenient to be used of them, which are hole, because they are wild of
nature and more bitter, and therefore causes fastidiousnesse or lothsomnesse of
the stomach. It is cold and dry in the second degree.

Endyue and Scariole
BE much like in their operation to Cykorie, but they are more convenient to
medicine than to meat. All be if Scariole called white Endyue, having the
tops of the leaves turned in, and laid in the earth, at the latter end of
summer, and covered, becomes white and crisp, like to the great stalks of
ca bag lettyse, which are in winter taken up and eaten. And to them that
have hot stomachs and dry, they be right wholesome, but being to much used,
or in very great quantity they engender the humour, which makes the cholike*
they be cold and moyste in the first degree.

Malowes
Are not cold in operation, but rather somewhat warm, and have in them a
slyppernesse: Gale. 2. de alimentis.
wherefore being boiled and moderatelye eaten with oil and vyneger, they make
meetly good concoction in the stomach, and causes the superfluous matter
therein easily to pass, and clen seth the bealye. It is hot and moyste in the
first degree.

White betis
Are also abstersiue and lowseth the bealy, but much eaten, annoveth the
stomach: but they are right good against obstructions or stoppynge of the
liver, if they be eaten with vyneger or mustard, likewise it helps the
spleen. It is cold in the first degre, and moist in the second.

Pourselan.
Doth mitigate the great heate in all the inward parts of the body, semblably
of the head and eyes: also it represses the rage of Venus, but if it be
preserved in salt or brine, it heats and pourgeth the stomach. It is cold
in the third degre, and moyste in the second.

Cheruyle.
Is very profytable unto the stomach, but it may not sustain very much
boylynge, eaten with vinegar, it provokes appetite, and also urine. The
decoction thereof drunk with wine, cleanses the bladder.

Sorrel.
Being sodden, it louseth the bealy. In a time of pestilence, if one being
fasting, do chew some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it
meruaylousely preserves from infections, as a new practiser called
Guainerius, doth write. And I my self have proved it in my household. The
sedes thereof brayed and drunk with wine and water, is very wholesome against
the cholike Dioscorides li. 2. ca pit. 106.
and frettynge of the guts: it stops fluxes, and helps the stomach
annoyed with replecion. It is cold in the third degree, and dry in the
second.

Persely.
Is very convenient to the stomach, and comfort appetite, and makes the
breath sweet, the sedes and root causes urine to pass well, and breaks
the stoone, dissolveth wyndes: the roots boiled in water, and thereof oxymel
being made, it dissolveth fleume, and makes good digestion. It is hot and
dry in the third degre.

Fenell,
Being eaten the sede or rote makes abundance of milk, likewise drunk with
ptysane or ale. The sede sommewhat restrayneth flux, provokes to pysse, and
mytigateth frettynges of the stomach and guts, specially the decoction of
the rote, if the matter, causynge fretting be colds, but if it be of a horte
cause, the use ^
thereof is dangerous, for inflammation or exulce^ation of the raynes or
bladder. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the first.

Anyse sede.
Makes sweet breathe, provokes urine, and drives down things, cleauyng to
the raynes, or bladder, styrreth up courage, and causes abundance of milk. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Beans.
They make wind, howe so ever they be ordered: the substance, which they do
make, is spungye, and not firm, all be it they be abstersyue, or clensynge the
body, they tarry lunge, or they be digested, and make gross juice in the
body, but if onyons be sodden with them, they be lass noyfull.

Peasyn.
Are much of the nature of beans, but they be lass wyndy, and passes faster
out of the body: they be also abstersyue, or clensyng, specially white peason,
and they also cause merely good nouryshynge, the husks taken away. And the
broth wherein they be sodden, cleuseth right well the raynes and bladder.

Rape rotes and Nauews. Cap. 9.
THe juice made by them, is very gross: therefore being much eaten, if they be
not perfytely concocte in the stomach, they do make crude or raw juice in the
veins. Also if they be not well boiled, they cause wyndes, and annoy the
stomach, make sometime frettynges: If they be well boiled first in clean
water, and that being caste away, the second time with fat flesh, they
nourys she much, and do neither louse nor bind the belly. But Nauews do not
nouryshe so much as rapes, but they be even as wyndy.

Turnepes,
Being well boiled in water, and after with fat flesh, nourysheth much,
augments the sede of man, provokes carnal lust. Eaten raw, they styre up
appetite to eat* being temperatly used, and be convenient unto them, which
have putrified matter in their breasts or lunges, causynge them to spit
eas^ly, but being much and often eaten, they make raw juice and wyndynesse.

Parsneps and carettes.
They do nouryshe with better juice than the other roots, specially carettes,
which are hot dry, and erpelleth wind. Not withstanding Gal. simp. med^.
li. 7.
much used they engender ill juice: but carettes lass than parsnepes, the
done and the other expels urine.

Radysshe rotes.
Have the virtue to extenuate, or make thyn, and also to warm. Also they cause
to break Paulus Ae ginera. Dioscorides. Li. 7. de aliment.
wind, and to pysse: being eaten before meals, they let the meat, that it
may not descend, but being eaten last, they make good digestion, and louseth
the bealy, though Galenus write contrary. For I, among divers other, by
experience have proved it: Notwithstanding they be vnholsome for them, that
have continually the gout, or payne in the joints.

Garlyke.
It doth extenuate and cut gross humours and slymy, dissolveth gross
wyndes, and heats all the body: also opens the places, which are stopped,
generally where it is well digested in the s^omake: it is holsom to divers
purposes, specially in the body, wherein is gross matter, or much cold
enclosed: if it be sodden until it tos^th his ^artenesse, it somewhat
nouryssheth, and yet loses not his property, to extenuate gross humours:
being sodden in milk, it profyteth much against distillations from the heed
into the stomach.

Onyons.
Do also extenuate, but the lunge onions more than the round, the red more
than the white, the dry more than they which be green: also raw more than
sodden: they styre appetite to meat, and put away lothsomnesse, and louse the
bealy, they quycken sight: and being eaten in great abundance with meat, they
cause one to sleep soundely.

Leekes.
Be of ill juice, and do make troublous dreams, but they do extenuate and
cleanse the body. Galen 7. cap. 138.
and also make it soluble, and provokes urine. Moreover it causes one to
spette out easily the fleume, which is in the breast.

Sauge
It heats, and somewhat binds, and therewith provokes urine, the decoction
of the leaves and branches being drunk. Also it stops bleedynge of
wounds, being laid unto them. Moreover it hath ben proved, that women,
which have ben lunge time without childerne, and have drunk. r. ounces of the
juice of sauge, with a grain of salt, a quarter of an hour before, that they
have companyed with their husbands, have conceived at that time. It is hot
and dry in the third degree, the vsynge thereof is good against palseyes.

Isope.
Doth heate and extenuate, whereby it dygesteth slymye fleume: being prepared
with figs, it pourged fleume downward, with honey and water upward, boiled
in vyneger, it helps the toth ache, if the te the be washed there with: it is
hot and dry in the third degre.

Bourage.
Comfort the heart, and makes one merry, eaten raw before meals, or laid
in wine that is drunk: Also mollyfieth the bealye, and prepares to the
stool. It is hot and moist in the myddell of the first degree.

Sauery.
Purges fleume, helps dygestyon, makes quycke syghte, provokes vryne, and
styreth carnal appetite: It is hot and dry in the third degre.

Rokat.
Heats much, and increases seed of man, ^ouoketh courage, helps
dig^stion, and somewhat louseth. It is hot and moyste in the second degree.

Time.
Dissolveth wyndes, breaks the stone, expels urine, and ceases
freattynges. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Penyryall.
Doth ertenuate, heate, and decocte, it reforms the stomach, oppressed with
fleume, it doth recomfort the faint spirire, it expels melancholy by
siege, and is medicinable against many diseases, it is hot dry in the third
degre.

Townecresses.
Paulus dyscommendeth, saying, that it resists Lib. (...).
concoction, and hurts the stomach, and makes ill juice in the body, taken
as medicine, it helps many diseases. It is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Rosemary.
Hath the veriue to heate, and therefore it dissolveth humour congeled with
cold: It helps against palseys, falling syckenes, old diseases of the
breast* tourmentes or frettyng, it provokes urine and sweat: it helps the
cough taken with pepper and honey, it puts away to the ache. the root being
chewed, or the juice thereof put into the to the: being bourned, the fume
thereof resysteth the pestplence: the rynde thereof sodden or burned, the fume
receives at the mouth, stop peth the reume, which falls out of the heed into
the chekes or throote: which I my self have proved, the grene leaves bruised,
do stop the hemorroides, if they be laid unto them: this herb is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Spices growing out of this realm used in meat or drink. Cap. 10,
Pepper.
Black pepper is hottest, and most dry, white pepper is next, lunge pepper
is most temperate. The general property of all kinds of pepper is to heate
the body, but as Galene saith, it pierces downward, and doth not spread
into the veins, if it be gross beaten. It dissolveth fleume and wind, it
helpethe digestion, expulseth urine, and it helps against the diseases of the
breast, procedynge of cold. It is hot in the first degre, dry in the second

Gynger.
Heats the stomach, and helps dygestyon, but it heats not so soon as
pepper: but afterward the heate remains longer, and causes the mouth to be
moysre: Being grene, or well confectioned in syrope, it comfort much the
stomach and heed, and quyckneth remembrance. if it be taken in the morrow
fasting. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Saffron.
Somewhat binds, heats, and comfort the stomach, and the heart specially,
and makes good digestion, being eaten or drunken in a small quantity. It is
hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Cloves.
Hath virtue to comfort the synewes, also to consume and dissolve superfluouse
humours, They be hot and dry in the third degre: sod with mylk, it
coforteth the debilite of nature.

Amazes.
Dioscorides commends to be drunk against spyttynge of blood, and bloody
fluxes, and excessive laxes. Paulus Jegineta, adds to it that it helps the
cholyke: they be hot in the second degree and dry in the third degre. It
is to the stomach very commodiouse, taken in a little quantity.

Nutmigges
With their sweet odour comfote and dissolve, and sometime comfort the power
of the sight and also the brayn in cold discrasies, and is hot and dry in the
second degre.

Of bread. Cap. 11.
Bread of fine flower of wheat, having no ^uyn, is slew of digestion, and
makes (...) ^nours, but it nouryssheth much: if it be l^yned, it dygesteth
sooner: bread ^ynge much bran, fylleth the bealye with excrementes, and
nouryssheth little or nothing, but shortly descends from the stomach: The
mean between both, suffyciently leuyned, well moulded, and moderately baken,
is the most hol some to every age. The greatest loves do norishe most fast,
for as much as the fire hath not exhausted the moisture of them. Hot
breadde, much eaten, makes fullness and thyrste, and slowly passes. Barley
bread cleanses the body, and doth not nouryshe so much as wheat, and makes
cold juice in the body.

Of flesh. Capi. 12.
BEfe of Englande to Englyshemen, which are in helthe, brings strong
nourysshynge, but it makes gross blood, and engenders melancholy: but being
of yonge oxen, not excedynge the age of four years, to them, which have
choleric stomachs, it is more convenient, than chykens, and other like fine
meates.

Swynes flesh.
Above all kinds of flesh in nouryshyng the body, Galene most comendeth
pork, not being of an old swyne, and that it be well digested of him, that
eats it. For it makes best juice, it is most convenient for young persons,
and them, which have sustained much labour, and therewith are fatigate, and
become weak. Young pig ges are not commended before that they be one month
old, for they do breed much superfluous humours.

Lamb.
Is very moyste and fleumatyke, wherefore it is not convenient for aged men,
except that it be very dry roasted, nor yet for them which have in their
stomach much fleume.

Mutton.
Galene doth not commend it, not withstanding De alime. (...). ^.
experience proves here in this realm, that if it be yonge, it is a right
temperate meat, and makes good juice: and therefore it is used more than any
other meat, in all diseases. And yet it is not like good in all places, nor
the sheep, which bears finest wolle, is not the sweetest in eating, nor the
most tender. But I have found in some countrays mutton, which in whiteness,
tenderness, and sweetness of the flesh, mought be well nygh compared to
kydde, and in digestion have proved as wholesome.

Kydde and veale.
Of Galene is commended next unto pork, but some men do suppose, that in health
and sickness they be much better than pork, the juice of them both being
more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beasts, which be dry of
their nature the youngest be most holsom: of them that are moyste, the eldest
are lest hurtful.

Hare, Cony.
Makes gross blood, it dries and stops, but yet it provokes a man to
pysse. Cony makes Hippo. de ^atione vi ^us lib. ^. capit. 19. Plin. ^3.
better and more pure nouryshement, and is sooner digested than hare. It is well
proved, that there is n^o meat more wholesome, or that more clean, firmly, and
temperately nourysshethe than rabettes.

Dere red and falowe.
Hippocrates affirms the flesh of hearts and hyndes, to be of ill juice,
harde of digestion, and dry, but yet it moves urine. Of falowe dere, he nor
any other old writer doth speak of, as I remember. I suppose, because there
be not in all the world so men, as be in England, where they consume a good
part of the best pasture in the realm, and are in nothing profytable, saving
that of the skynnes of them is made better leather, than is of calves: the
hunting of them being not so pleasant, as the hunting of other venerye or
vermin, the flesh much more vnholsome and unpleasant, than of a red dere,
ingendrynge melancholy, and making many fearefulle dreams, and disposes the
body to a fever, if it be much eaten: not withstanding the fat thereof (as
some learned men have supposed) is better to be dygested, than the lean.

Of birds.
The flesh of all birds, is much lighter, tha the flesh of beasts in
comparison, most specyally of those fowls, which trust most to their
wings, and do breed in high countries.

Capons, hens, and chyckens.
The Capon is above al other fowls praised, for as much as it is easily
digested, and makes little ordure, and much good nouryshement. It is
commodiouse to the breast and stomach. Hens in winter are almost equal unto
the capon: but they do not make so strong nouryshement. Auycen saith, if they
be roasted in the bealy of a kydde or lamb, they will be the better. Chikens in
summer, specially if they be ^o^k^elles, are very convenient for a weak
stomach, and nourysheth a little. The flesh of a rock is harde of dy^ion,
but the broth, wherein it is boiled, louseth the bealy, and having sodden in it
colewortes, Polypodium, or Cartamus, it pourgeth ill huinours, and is
medicmable against goutes, joint aches, and fevers, which come by courses.

Fesannt.
Excedeth all fowls in sweetness and holsomnesse, and is equal to a capon in
nourishing, but he is somewhat dryer, and is of some men put in comparison,
mean between a hen and a patryche.

Partridge.
Of all fowls is most soonest digested: and hath in him much nutriment,
comfort the brain, and makes sede of generation, and re^eth lust, which
is abated.

Quayles.
All though they be of some men commended, yet experience proves them to
increace melancholy, and are of a small nouryshynge.

Larks.
Be as well the flesh as the broth, very wholesome: eaten roasted, they do much
help against the cholyke, as Dioscorides saith.

A plouer.
Is slow of digestion, nouryssheth little, and increases melancholy.

Black birds or ousyls.
Among wild foul hath the chief praise, for lightness of digestion, and that
they make good nouryshement, and little ordure.

Sparrows.
Be harde to digest, and are very hot, and styreth up Venus, specyally the
brains of them.

Woodcoc^es.
Are of a good temperance, and meetly lyghte in dygestyon.

Pygeons.
Be easily dygested, and are very wholesome to them, which are fleumatike, or
pure melancholy.

Goose,
Is harde of digestion, but being yonge and fat, the wings be easy to
digest in a hole stomach, and nourysheth competently.

Duck,
Is hotter than goose, and hard to digest, and makes wars juice, saving the
branues on the breast boon, and the neck is better than the remnant.

Crane and bustarde.
Crane is harde of digestyon, and makes ill juice, but being hanged up lunge
in the air, he is the lass vnholsome. Bustarde being fat, and kept without
meat a day or two before that he be killed, to expulse his ordure, and than
drawn, and hanged as the crane is, being roosted or baken, is a good meat,
and nourysheth well, if he be well dygested.

Hearon, Byttour, Shou^lar,
Being yonge and fat, be lyghtlyer digested than crane: and the byttour
sooner than the heron. And the shoular sooner than any of them, but all these
fowls must be eaten with much gynger or pepper, and have good old wine
drunk after them, and so shall they be more easily digested, and the juice
coming of them be the lass noyfull.

The parts and members of birds and beasts, Cap. 13.
THe wings braunes and neck of geese, capons, hens, fesaunt, partryche, and
small birds being fa^te, are better than the legs in dygestyon, lighter in
nouryshyng, of wyldfoule and pygeons being fat the legs are better than the
wings: the braunes of duck, teale, and wygeon except, which is better to
dygeste than the tesydewe.

The gysar or stomach.
Of a goose or hen being fat with bran and milk, being well sodden or
made in pou^der, is good for the stomach, in making it strong to digest, and
nourysheth competently.

The lyuar.
Of a capon, hen, fesaunt, or goose, being ^ade fat with milk myxte with
their meat, is not only easy to digest, but also makes good juice, and
nourysheth excellently. But the livers of beasts be ill to dygeste, passes
slowly, and makes gross blod, but it is strong in norishyng

The inward of beasts, as trypes and chitterlynges.
The flesh of them is more harde to dygeste. And therefore although they be
well digested, yet make they not juice naturally sanguine, or clean, but raw
juice and cold: and requires a lunge time, to be converted into blood.

The lunges or lights.
Are more easy to dygeste than the liver, and lass nourysheth, but the
nouryshement, that it makes, is fleumatyke: All be it the lunges of a Fox, is
medicinable for them, which have syknesse of the lunges.

The spleen or ^ylte.
Is of ill juice, for it is the ^aber of melancholy.

The heart.
Is of harde flesh, and therefore is not soon dygested, nor passes shortly,
but where he is well dygesteth, the juice that it makes, is not to be
dyspraysed.

The brain.
Is fleumatike, of gross juice, slow in digestynge, noyouse to the stomach,
but where it is well dygesteth, it nourysheth much.

Marowe.
Is more delectable than the brain, it is ill for the stomach, but where it
is well dygesteth, it nourysheth much.

The stones and vdders,
Being well digested, do nouryshe much, but the stones are hotter with their
moystnesse, the vdders cold and fleumatike, they both do increase sede of
generation: but the blood made of the vdder is better than that, which
comes of the stones, except it be of calves and lambs. Also the stones of
cocks, makes commendable nouryshement.

The heed.
The flesh thereof nourishes much, and augments sede: but it is slow of
dygestyon, and noyeth the stomach, but to them, which use much exercise, it
is not discommendable.

The tongue.
Is of a spoungy and sanguine substance, but the kernelles and gristell, which
are in the roots, if they be well dygested, they make good nouryshement, if
they be not well dygested, they make fleume.

The feet.
Being well boiled and tender, in a hole stomach, dygesteth well, and makes
good juice, and passes forth easily. Galene commends the fete of swyne. But
I have proved, that the feet of a yonge bullock tenderly sodden, and laid in
souse two days or three, and eaten cold in the evening, have brought a
choleric stomach into a good digestion and sleep, and therewith hath also
expulsed salt fleume and choler, and this have I found in my self by often
experience: always foresene, that it be eaten before any other meat, without
drinking immediately after it.

Of fysshe generally. Cap. 14.
THe best fyshe after the opinion of Galen, is that, which swymmeth in the
pure see, and is tossed and lift up with winds and sourges. The more calm
that the water is, the wars is the fyshe, they which are in muddy waters, do
make much fleume and ordure, taken in fens and dyches be warste, being in
fresh ryuers and swyfte, be sometime commendable: albeit generally, all kinds
of fyshe makes more thynner blood, than flesh, so that it doth not much
nouryshe, and it doth sooner pass out by vapours: to a hot choleric
stomach, or in fevers, sometime they be wholesome, being new, fresh, and not
very harde in substance or slimy, harde fyshe is hard of digestion, but the
nourishement thereof is more fyrme, than that, which is soft: those which
have much gross humours in them, are best powdered.

Of butter. Cap. 15.
Butter is also nourysshynge, and profits to them, which have humours
superfluous, in the breast or lunge, and lacks rypyng clensynge of them:
specyally if it be eaten with sugar or honey. If it be well salted, it heats
and elenseth the more.

Of Chese. Cap. 16.
CHese by the hole sentence of all auncyent wryters, lets digestion, and is
enemy unto the stomach. Also it engenders ill humours, bredeth the stone.
The chese which doth lest harm, is soft chese, reasonably salted, which
sum men do suppose, nourysheth much.

Of Eggs. Cap. 17
Eggs of fesantes, hens, and partriches, be of all other meates most
agreeable unto nature, specially if they be new laid: if they be reere, they
do cleanse the throat and the breast. If they be harde, they be slow in
digestion: but being ones digested, they do nouryshe much. Mean between rear
and hard, they dygeste conveniently, and nouryshe quickly. Eggs well poched,
are better tha roasted. If they be fried harde, they be of ill nouryshement, do
make stynkyng fuines in the stomach, do corrupt other meates with whom they be
mingled. They be most wholesome, when they be poched, and most vnholsome, when
they be fried. Dioscorides saith, If they be souped warm, before any other
meat, they do heal the griefs of the bladder, and raynes, made with
grauelle: alsoo forenesse of the chekes, and throat, and spytting of blood:
and they be good against eatarres, or styllynge out of the heed, into the
stomach.

Of drinks, and first of Water Capit. 18.
Undoubtedly water hath preemynence above all other lycours, not only because
it is an element, that is to say, a pure matter, whereof all other lycours have
their original substance: but also forasmoch, as it was the very natural and
first drink, to all manner of creatures. wherefore the fayeng of Pindarus the
poet, was ever well allowed, which saith, water is best. And one thing is to
be well considered that from the creation of the world, until the vniuersalle
deluge or flood, during which time, men lived eight or nyne hundred years,
there was none other drink used nor known, but water. Also the true folowers
of Pythagoras doctrine, drank only water, and yet lived lunge: as Apollonius,
and other: and in the searching out of secrete and mystical things, their
wits excelled. More over, we have scene men and women of great age, and
strong of body, which never, or very seldom, drank other drink, than pure
water: As by example, in Cornwall, although that the country be in a very
cold quarter, which prouethe, that if men from their infancy, were
accustomed to none other drink but to water only, moderately used it shulde
be sufficient to keep natural moisture, and to cause the meat that is eaten
to pierce and descend unto the places of digestion, which are the purposes that
drink serves fore. But now to the qualities of water, after the sentence of
ancient philosophers and physicians, The rain water, after the opinion of the
most men, if it be received pure clean, is most subtle and penetratyue, of
any other waters: the next is that, which yssueth out of a spring in the
east, and passes swyftely, among great stones or rocks: the third is of a
clean river, which rennethe on great harde stones or pebbles. There be divers
means to try out, which is the best water, for that which is lyghtest in
poise or weight is best. Alsoo that, whereof comes lest skymme or froth,
when it doth boyle. Also that, which will soonest be hot. More over deape
lynnen clothes into sundry waters, and after lay them to dry, that which is
soonest dry, the water wherein it was depid is most subtylle. After a great
surfeit, cold water drunken is a general remedy. Hippocrates affirms, that
in sharpe and fervent diseases, none other remedy is to be required, than
water. And Galene will not, that chylderne shulde be let from drinking of
water: De ratioe uictus in mor. acutis li. 3.
but that when they feel them selves very hot, after meals, and do desire to
drink water, specially of a clean fountain, they should be suffered. Also
Hippocrates saith, In such syknes where as thou fear, lest the heed should
be vehemently grieved, or the mind peryshed there must thou give either water,
or white wine allayed with much water. Not withstanding there be in water
causes of divers diseases, as of swellynge of the spleen, and the liver, it
also flytteth and swymmeth, and it is long or it pierces, in as much, as it is
cold and slow in decortion, it loses not the bealy, nor provokes urine.
Also in this it is vicyous, that of his proper nature, it makes none ordure.
Fynally, always respect must be had to the person, that drynketh it, for to
yonge men, and them, that be hot of complexion, it doth lass harm, and
sometime it profyteth: but to them that are feeble, old, fleu matyke, or
melancholy, is not convenient.

Of Wine. Cap. 19.
PLato, the wisest of all philosophers, doth affirm, that wine moderately
drunk, norysheth and coforteth, as well all the body, as the spirits of man.
And therefore, god died ordeyne it for mankynde, as a remedy against the
incommodities of aege: that thereby they shulde seem to return unto youth,
forget heuynes. Undoubtedly wine heats and moysteth the body, which
qualities chiefly conserveth nature. And Galene of all wynes, commends that,
which is yelowe and clear, saing, That it is the hotest, and white wine lest
hot. And the colour mean between both, of semblable temperature. The yelowe
wine, which is the proper colour of very hot wynes, to old men doth bring
these comodites First it heats al their members, also it purges by vryne,
the watery substance of the blood. Moreover the wynes, which be pale or
yelowe, and full of substance, they do increase blood, nouryshe the body, but
for the more part old men have need of such wynes, which do provoke urine:
for as much as in them do abound watery excrementes, or superfluities. And
they which do tarry lunge in the bealy, be not apt for aged men. Black or deep
red wynes and thick, do bind and congele that which they do find in the
body, and although some of them do not lunge abide in the bealy, yet they move
not urine, but rather withdraws: but yet they do harm to old men, for as
much as they do stop the eudites of the spleen, the liver, the raynes. Alsoo
gross wynes be best for them, which desire to be fat, but it makes
oppilations: old wine and clear is better for them, that be fleumatike. Galene
also prohibiteth chyldern to drink any Lib. 1. de tuenda sanitate.
wine, forasmoch as they be of an hot and moist temperature, and so is wine:
and therefore it heats and moysteth to much their bodies, and fylleth their
heeds with vapours. More over, he would, that yonge men should drink little
wine, for it shall make them prone to fury, and to lechery: and that part of
the soul, which is called rationable, it shall make troublous and dull^: not
withstanding, yet it is sommetyme profytable to mitigate or expel ordure,
made of coler or melancholy. Also it profyteth against drythe, which happens
in the substance of the body, either by to much labour, or by the propre
temperature of age: for wine moysteth and nourysheth that, which is to dry,
also mytigateth and dissolveth the sharpness of cholet, and purges it also by
urine and sweat: Finally (as Theognes saith Much drinking of wine is ill, but
moderate drinking of wine is not only not ill, but also commodious and
profitable, which sentence is confirmed by Jesus Syrac, in the book named
Ecclesiasticus, saying, wine moderately drunk, rejoices both the body and
Eccle. 3^.
soul. wherefore to conclude this chapyter, There is neither meat nor drink,
in the use whereof ought to be a more discrete moderation, than in wine,
considering that being good drunk in due time and mesure, it not only
conserveth natural and radical moisture, whereby life in^ureth, but also it
helps the pryneypall members, which belong to digestyon, to do they^
office: On the other part, being ill or corrupt or taken out of order and
measure, it doth contrary to all the premysses, besides that it transforms a
man or woman, making them beastly. More of the qualities of wine, shall be
touched hereafter in the order of dyete.

Of Milk. Cap. 20.
Milk is comparte of three substances, cream, whey, and cruddes. The most
excellent milk is of a woman The milk of a cow is thyekest, the milk of a
cantlle is most subtle, the milk of a goote is between cow milk, and
camelle milk. Ewes milk is between cow milk and asses milk. Alsoo the
milk of beasts, fedyng in large pastures, and out of fens and marsshes, is
better than of them, which be fed in little closes, or in watery grounds.
In spring time milk is most subtle, and milk of young beasts, is
holsomer, than of old. To chylderne, old men, and to them, which be
oppressed with melancholy, or have the flesh consumed with a fever ethike,
milk is convenient. And generally to all them, which do not feel the milk
rise in their stomokes, after that they have eaten it: and in those persons,
it doth easily pourge that, which is in the bealy superfluous. And afterward
it enters into the veins, and brings good nouryshement. Who so ever hath an
appetit to eat or drink milk, to the entente that it shall not arise or
abrayde in the stomach, let him put in to a vessel, out of the which he will
receive it, a few leaves of myntes, sugar, or pure honey. And in to that
vessel cause the best to be milked, and so drink it warm from the vdder: or
else let him do as Paulus Aegineta teaches, that is to say, boyle first the
milk with an easy fire, and sethe it after with a hotter fire, and skimme it
clean, and with a sponge deaped in cold water, take that clean away, which
wold be burned to the vessel, than put to the milk salt and Oribasius de
confectione ciborum. li. 3.
sugar, and stere it often. More over milk taken to pourge melancholy, would
be drunk in the morning abundantly new mylked, as is before written. And he
that drynketh, shulde absteyne from meat, and exercise, until the milk be
digested, and have somewhat pourged the bealy. For with labour it becomes
sour: and therefore it requires rest and watch, or to walk very softly.
Finally, where men and women be used from their chyldhode, for the more part,
to milk, and do eat none or little other meat, but milk and butter, they
appear to be of good complexion and facion of body, and not so much vexed with
sickness, as they which drink wine or ale: not withstanding much use of
milk in men sanguyne or choleryke, doth engender the stone.

Of ale, bier, cider, and why.
I Can neither here nor rede, that ale is made and used for a come drink in
any other coutray than England, Scotland, Ireland and Poyle. The latin word
Cereuitia, is indifferent as well to ale as bier, and the only difference
between them is, that bier hath hoppes sodden in it, ale ought to have none.
If the corn be good, the water holsom and clean, and the ale or bier well
and perfytely brewed and cleansed, and by the space of.vi. days or more,
settled and defecate, it must needs be a necessary and convenient drink, as
well in syckenesse as in health: considering that barley corn, where of it is
made, is commended, and used in medicine, in all parts of the world: and
accounted to be of a syngular efficacy, in reducyng the body into good temper,
specyally which is in a distemperature of heate. For what ancient physician is
there, that in his works commends not ptysane, which is none other than pure
barley, brayed in a mortar, and sodden in water, the same thing is small and
clean ale or bier, saving that perchance, the drienge of the malt is cause
of more drythe to be in the ale, than in ptysane. And the hoppes in bier
makes it colder in operation. But to say as I think, I suppose, that neither
ale nor bier is to be compared to wine, considering, that in them do lack
the heate and moisture, which is in wine. For that being moderately used, is
most like to the natural heate and moisture of man body. And also the
lykour of ale and bier, being more gross, do engender more gross vapours,
and corrupt humours, than wine doth, being drunk in like excess of
quantity.

And one thing is to be noted, which was lately well marked, of a man of
excellent learning, being vexed with the syknes of the stone. That in them,
which do always use to drink ale or bear the stone gravel engendered in them, is
white of colour: And in them, which do use to drink wine for the most part,
the stones and gravel, which be engenders in them, be red of colour. Not
withstanding commonly the colour of the stone follows the humour, which doth
most abound in the pacyent. As coler makes the gravel more red, fleume
makes it more white. Also some men do suppose, that red gravel is engendered
in the raynes: white gravel in the bladder. More over, who so ever uses
ingurgitation of ale or bicre, his breathe shall be more loathsome, than the
breathes of them, which do take the excess of wine: for the wine, by the
reason of his heate, is sooner digests, and doth leave behind him, fewer
dregs. As for Cider, may not be good in any condition, considering (as I
say) that all fruits do ingenderyll humours, do cool to much natural heate:
but to them, which have abundance of reddecholer, moderately used, it
somewhat profits in mytigation of excessive heate. But who that will dyly
gently mark in the countrays, where cider is used for a common drink, the men
and women have the colour of their visage palled, the skin of their visage
ryueled, although that they be young. Why if it be left of the butter, bring
well ordered, and not drunk, vntylle it have a thycke curd of milk over it
like to a hat, is a right temperate drink: forasmoch as by the vn^tuositie
of the butter, whereof the why retains some portion, it is both may and
nouryshynge, and cleanses the breast: and by the subtylnesse of it self, it
descedeth soon from the stomach, and is shortly digested. Also by reason of the
affinity, which it hath with milk, it is conuertible into blood and flesh,
specially in those persons, which do inhabit the north parts, in whom
natural heate is conglutinate, and therefore is of more puissance and virtue in
the office of concoction. Also custom frome chylhoode doth elevate the power
of meates and drynkes in their disposition, not withstanding that the four
humours, sangume, choler, fleume, and melancholy, must also be considered as it
shall apper^ in divers places hereafter,

Of Honey. Cap. 22.
Honey as well in meat as in drink (...) of incomparable efficacy, for it not
only cleanses, alters, and nourysheth, but also it lunge time preserves that
uncorrupted, which is put into it. In so much as Plini^ saith, Such is the
nature of honey, that it suffered not the bodies to putrefy. And he affirms,
that he did Pli. li. 22.
see an Hippocentaure (which is a beast half man, half horse) brought in
honey to Claudius the emperor out of Egypt, to Rome. And he tells also of
one Pollio Romulus, who was above a hundred years old, of whom Augustus the
emperor demanded, by what means he lived so lunge, and retained still the
vygoure or lyuelynesse of body and mind, Pollio answered, that he did it inward
with mead (which is drink made with honey and water) outward with oil. Which
saying agrees with the sentence of Democritus, the great philosopher: who
being demanded, howe a man moughte live lunge in helthe, he answered, If he
wet him within with honey, without with oil The same philosopher, when he was
a hundred years old and nyne, prolonged his life certain days with the
evaporation of honey, as Aristoxenus writes. Of this excellent matter, most
wonderfully wrought and gathered by the little be, as well of the pure dew of
heaven, as of the most subtle humour of sweet and virtuous herbs flowers, be
made likors comodious to mankind, as mead, metheglyn, oxymel. Mead which is
made with one part of honey, and four times so much of pure water, and boiled
until no skymme do remain, is much commended of Galene, drunk in summer, for
preserving of Galen. de tuend. san. lib. 4.
^elthe. The same author always commends the vsynge of honey, either raw
eaten with fine bread somewhat leuened, or sodden, and received as drink. Also
mead perfectly made, cleanses the breast and lunges, causes a man to spyt
easily, and to pysse abundantly, and purges the bealy moderately. Metheglyn,
which is most used in wales, by reason of hot herbs boiled with honey, is
hotter than mead, and more comfort a cold stomach, if it be perfectely
made, and not new or very stale. Oximell is, where to one part of vinegar is
put double so much of honey, four times as much of water, and that being
boiled unto the third part, and clean skymmed with a feather, is used to be
taken, where in the stomach is much fleume or matter vndygested, so that it
be not red choler, Loke the use thereof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other
good qualities of honey, I omytte to write of, until some other occasyon shall
happen, to remember them particularly, where they shall s^me to be profytable.

Sugar. Cap. 23.
OF sugar, I do find none ancient author of greeks or latynes, to write by
name, but only Paulus Aegineta, who says in this wise, after that he hath
treated of honey, Moreover sugar, which they call honey, that is brought to us
from Arabia, callid felix, is not so sweet as our honey, but is equalle in
virtue, and doth not annoy the stomach, nor causes thyrste. These be the words
of Paulus. It is now in dayely experience, that sugar is a thing very
temperate and nouryshynge, and where there is choler in the stomach, or that
the stomach abhors honey, it may be used for honey in al things, wherein honey
is required to be.

Of time. Cap. 24.
IN the consyderation of time, for taking of meates and drynkes, it is to be
remembered, that in winter meates ought to be taken in great abundance, and of a
more gross substance than in summer, forasmoch as the exterior air, which
compasses the body being cold, causes the heate to withdraw into the inner
parts, where being enclosed, and contract together in the stomach entrails,
it is of more force to boyle digest that, which is received into it. Also
meates roasted, are tha better than sodden, and flesh fish powdered, is tha
better than in summer. Herbs be not than commendable, specially raw, neither
fruits, except quynces roasted or baked, drink should be than taken in little
quatitie. Moreover wines shall need no water, or very little, and that to
coleryke persons: red wynes, and they, which be thick sweet, may be than
most surely taken of them, which have none oppilations, or the stone. Always
remember, that in winter fleume increases by reason of rain and moystnesse of
that season, also the length of nyghtes and much rest. And therefore in that
time choleric persons, are best at ease, semblably Gal. in comment. in apho. 2.
li. 3.
are yonge men, but to old men winter is ennemye. It begins the.viii. day
of November, endures until the.viii. day of February.

The spring time doth participate the first part with winter, the latter
part, with summer. Wherefore if the first part be cold, than Hipocrat. (...)
humana.
shall the diet be according to winter. If the end be hot, than shall the
diet be of summer. If ^ot^e parts be temperate, than shulde there be also a
temperannce in diet: always considering, that fleume yet remains, blood than
^r^aseth meat wold be lass in quantity than ^ynter, and drink somewhat more.
Spring time begins the.viii. day of February, (...) cotinueth until
the.viii. day of May.

In semmer the inward heat is but little, the stomach doth not digest so
strongely nor quykly Gal. (...) in (...). (...). lib (...).
as in winter, wherefore in that season, eating often, and a little at ones, is
most convenient. And Damascenus says, that fasting in summer dries the
body, makes the colour salowe, engenders melancholy, and hurts the sight.
also boiled meat, bread steped in white broth, Hipocrates de ^moribus.
with s^dden lettyse, or cykorie, are than good to be used also variety in
meates, but not at oone meal, potages made with cold herbs, drink in more
abundance, wine alayde with water, to hot complexions much, to cold natures
lass. In this season blood increases, and toward the end thereof, choler.
And therefore they, which Galen in comment. in aphor.
be cold of nature and moyste, are than best at case, hot natures and dry
wa^ste. More over, children, and very yonge men in the beginning of summer, are
holest, old folk in the latter end and in haruest^ somer begins the.viii.
day of May, cotinueth until the.viii. day of August.

Autumn begins the.viii. day of August, ends the.viii. day of November,
that seson of the year is variable, the air changeable, by occasyo whereof,
happen sondry siknessis, blod decreases, melancholy abundeth: wherefore al sumer
fruit wold tha be eschewed, forasmoch as they make ill juice and winds in the
body. In this time meat would be more abundant than in somer, but somewhat
drier: drink must be lass in quantity, but lass myxte with water. This time
is dangerous to all ages, al natures, and all countrays, but the natures hot
and moyste, be lest indamaged.

Diet concerning sondry times of the year written by the old physician
D^ocles to king Antigonus.
FRom the.xii. day of December, at the which time the day is at the shortest,
vntyl the nynthe day of Marche, which do conteyne lxxxx. days, reumes and
moystures do increase, than meates and drynkes naturally very hot, would be
moderately used, also to drink abundantly wine without alaye or with little
water, and to use liberally the company of a woman, is not vnholsome to the
body.

FRom the nynth day of Marche, at which time is eaquinoctium vernu, unto the.
xxv day of April, sweet fleume and blood do increase, therefore use than
things having much juice and sharpe, exercise the body dilygently, than may
ye use safely the company of a woman.

From the xxv. day of Apryll. to the.xiiii. day of June, Choler increases,
than use all things, that are sweet, and do make the bealy soluble, forbear
carnal company with women.

From the.xiiii. day of June, at which time the day is at the legest, unto
the.xii. day of September, doth melancholy reign, forbear lechery, or use it
moderately.

From the.xii. day of September, unto the xvii. day of October, do abound
fleume and thynne humours, than would all flures and distillations be
prohibited, than all sharpe meates and drynkes and of good juice, are to be
used, and lechery eschewed.

Frome the.xvii. day of October, to the.xii. day of December, increases
gross fleume, use therefore all bitter meates, sweet wynes, fat meat, and
much exercise.

Of ages. Cap. 25.
Children wold be nourysheth with meates Gal. de tu. san. li. 1. Chyldern.
and drynkes, which are moderately hot and moyste, not withstanding Galene
doth prohibit them the use of wine, because it moysteth and heats to much
the body, and fylleth the heeds of them, which are hot and moyste, with
vapours. Also he permits them in hot whether to drink clear water of the
fountain.

A child growing fast in his members toward a man, so that he seems well
fed in the body, is than to be feared of fulness of humours, Oribasins de
virtute simpli. li. 1.
and if it be perceived, that he is replete, than must be withdrawn and
minished some part of that nutriment, and according unto his age, some
evacuation wold be devised, other while by exercise, walking up and down
fasting, and before that they eat any meat, let them exercise them selfes
with their own labours and do their own accustomed busynes, and eat the meates
whereunto they be most used, so that it be such, that may not hurt them. And
this need they not to know of physicians, but by experience and diligent
search by their stool, their norices shall perceive what dygesteth well, and
what doth not.

But if it appear, that by excessive feeding the bealy of the child is fuller
and greater than it was wont to be, and that which passes by the bealy, is
corrupted, or his sweat stynketh, these things known, if they eat strong
meates, give them not one kind of meat, but divers, that the novelty of the
meat may help, that they may go more easily to the stole. For if any have an
unreasonable appetite, he is sooner recovered, if he be pourged by a boyle or
impostume come forth and broken, before that the meat be corrupted: and
after that let him eat fine meates, and being ones hole, return by little
and little to his old custom.

Yonge men, exceeding the age of.xiiii. years, Young men
shall eat meates more gross of substance, colder and moyster: also salads of
cold herbs, and to drink seldom wine, except it be alayd with water. All be
it all these things must be tempered, according to their complexions, exercise
and quietness in living, whereof ye shall reed in their proper places
hereafter.

Did men, in whom natural heate strength Old men
seems to decay, should use always meates, which are of quality hot and
moist, and there with all easy to be digested, and absteyne utterly from al
meates drinks, which will engender thick juice and slymy, semblably from
wine, which is thick, sweet, and dark red wynes, and rather use them,
which will make thyn humours, and will purge well the blood by vryne:
therefore white or yelowe wynes, and perchance french clarette wynes, are for
them very com, Paulus Eg^eta. li. 1. cap. 23.
mendable. Also wine prepared with pure honey clarified, wherein roots of
persely or fenelle be steped, specially if they suspect any thing of the
stoone, or gout* And if they more desire to cleanse their raynes and bladder:
than is it good to use small white wine, as racked renishe wine, or other like
to it. and sommetyme to stepe over night therein a persely root slyt, and
somewhat bruised, and a little lykorice. Fynally, let them beware of all
meates, that will stop the poores, and make obstructions or oppilations, that
Opilatios what they are.
is to say, with clammy matter stop the places, where the natural humours
are wrought and digested, the which meates I have before set in a table.
But if it chance them, to eat any such meat in abundance, let them take
shortly such things, as do resyste opilations, or resolve them. As white
pepper, bruised and myxte with their meates or drink: garlyke also or onyons,
if they abhor them not. Always remember, that aged men should eat often, and
but little at every time, for it fares by them, as it doth by a lamp,
which is almooste extinct, which by powrynge in of oil little and little,
is lunge kept bournynge: and with much oil poured in at ones, it is clean
put out. Also they must forbear all things, which do engender melancholy,
whereof ye shall rede in the table before: and breadde clean without leven, is
to them vnholsome.

Moderation in diet, having respect to the strength or weakness of the person.
Cap. 26.
Now here it must be considered, that all though I have written a general diet
for every age, yet netheles it must be remembered, that some children and young
men, either by debilite of nature, or by some accydentall cause, as syckenes,
or much study, happen to gather humours fleumatike or melancholy in the places
of digestio, so that cocoction or digestion is as weak in them as in those,
which are aged Semblably some old men find nature so beneficial unto them,
that their stomachs and livers are more strong to digest, than the said
yonge men, some perchance have much choler remaining in them. In these
cases the said yonge men must use the diet of old men, or nygh unto it,
vntyl the discrasy be removed, having always respect to their universal
complexions, as they, which are naturally choleric, to use hot things in a
more temperance than they, which be fleumaticke, or melancholy by nature. The
same observation shall be to Hipocrat. aphor. Galen. in comment.
old men, saving that age, of his own property is cold and dry,
therefore the old man, that is cholerycke, shall have more regard to moisture
in meates, than the yonge man being of the same complexion. Foresene always,
that where nature is offended or grieved, she is curyd by that, which is
contrary to that, which offends or grieves, as cold by heate, heate by
cold, drythe by moisture, moisture by drythe. In that whereby nature shulde be
nourished in a hole and temperate body, things must be taken, which are
like to the mans nature in quality and degre. As where one hath his body in a
good temper, things of the same temperance doth nourysshe him. But where he
is out of temper, in heate, cold, moisture, or dryth, temperate meates or
drynkes, nothing do profyt him, for being out of the mean and perfyte
temperature, nature requires to be thereto reduced by contraries, remembrynge
not only, that contraries are remedy unto their contraries, but also in every
contrary, consideration be had of the proporcion in quantity.

Times in day concerning meals. Cap. 27.
Besides the times of the year, and ages, there be also other times of eating
and drinking to be remembered, as the sondry times in the day, which we call
meals, which are in noumber and dystaunce, according to the temperature of
the country and person: As where the country is cold, and the person lusty,
and of a strong nature, there may ^o meals be used, or the lass distance of
time between them. Contrariwise in contrary countrays and personages, the cause
is before rehearsed, where I have spoken of the diet of the times of the year,
not withstadyng here must be also consideratio of exercise and rest, which do
augment or apeireth the natural disposition of bodies, as shall be more
declared herafter in the chapiter of exercise. But concerning the general usage
of coutreys, admitting the bodies to be in {per}fit state of health. I suppose
that in England young men, until they come to the age of.xl. years, may well
eat three meals in one day, as at breakefaste, dinner, supper, so that between
breakfast and dinner, be the space of four hours at the least, between dinner
and supper.vi. hours, and the breakfast lass tha the dinner, and the dinner
moderate, that is to say, lass than saciete or fulness of bealy, and the drink
thereunto measurable, according to the dryenesse or moystnesse of the meat.
For much abundance of drink at meal, drowned the meat eaten, and not only
lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but also causes it to pass
faster than nature requires, and therefore engenders much fleume, and
consequently reumes, crudenes in the veins, debility and slyppernesse of the
stomach, continual flux, and many other inconveniences to the body and
members. But to return to meals, I think breakefastes necessary in this
realm, as well for the causes before rehearsed, as Brekefast.
also forasmoche as choler, being fervent in the stomach, sends up fumosities
unto the brayn, and causes heed ache, and sometime becomes aduste, and
smouldreth in the stomach, whereby happens peryllous sycknes, and sommetyme
sudden death, if the heate enclosed in the stomach have not other convenient
matter to work on: this daily experience proves, and natural reason
confirms. Therefore men and women not aged, having their stomachs clean
without putrified matter, slepyng moderately and sondely in the night, and
feeling them self lyghte in the morning, and sweet breathed, let them on
gods name break their fast: Coleryke men with gross meat, men of other
complexions with lighter meat, fore scene, that they labour somewhat before:
semblably their dinner and supper, as I have before written, so that they sleep
not incontinent after their meals. And here I will not recite the sentences of
authors, which had never experience of english men's natures, or of the just
temperature of this realm of Englande, only this counsel of Hipocrates shall
Hipocrat. aphor. 13. lib. 1. Galen. de tuend. san.
be sufficient. We ought to grant somewhat to time, to age, and to custom:
not withstanding where great werynesse or drythe, grieved the body, there
ought the dinner to be the less, and the longer distance between dinner and
supper. alsoo much rest, except a little soft walking, that by an upright
moving, the meat being styred, may descend. This is always to be remembered,
that where one feleth him self full, and grieved with his dinner, or the savour
of his meat by erurtation ascedeth or that his stomach is weke by late
syckenesse or much study, than is it most convenient, to absteyne from supper,
and rather provoke him self to sleep much, than to eat or drink any
thing. Also to drink between meals, is not laudable, except very great
thirst constrains, for it interrupts the office of the stomach in
concoction, and causes the meat to pass faster than it shulde do, and the
drink being cold, it rebukes natural hete, that is working, and the meat
remaining raw, it corrupts dygestyon, and makyth crudenesse in the veins,
wherefore he that is thyrsty, let him consider the occasyo. If it be of salt
fleume, let him walk fair and softly, and only wasshe his mouth, and his
throote with barley water, or small ale, or lye down and sleep a little, and
so the thyrste will pass away, or at the least be well assuaged. If it happen
by extreme heate of the air, or by pure choler, or eating of hot spices,
let him drink a little iulep made with clean water and sugar, or a little
small bier or ale, so that he drink not a great glut, but in a little
quantity, let it styll down softly into his stomach, as he sytteth, and than
let him not move suddenly. If the thyrste be in the evening, by eating to
much, and drinking of wine, than after the opinion of the best learned
physicians, and as I my self have often experienced, the best remedy is, if
there be no fever, to drink a good draught of cold water, immediately, or else
if it be not peynefull for him to vomyte, to provoke him thereto with a little
warm water, and after to wash his mouth with vinegar and water, and so to
sleep lunge and soundly, if he can. And if in the morning he feel any
fumosities rising, than to drink iulep of violettes, or for lack thereof, a
good draught of very small ale or bier somewhat warmed, without eating any
thing after it.

Of dyuersitie of meates eaten whereby helthe is appaired. Cap. 28.
NOw let this be a general rule, that sondry meates, being divers in
substance and quality, eaten at one meal, is the greatest ennemy to health,
that may be, and that which engenders most siknesses, for some meates being
gross, and harde to dygeste, some fine easy to digest, do require diverse
operations of nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach, that is to say,
much heate and temperate heate, which may not be together at one time.
Therefore when the fine meat is suffycientlye boiled in the stomach, the gross
meat is raw, so both iuyces, the one good and petfite, the other gross and
crude, at one time dygested, and sent into the veins and body, needs must
health decay, and sycknesses be engendered. Likewise in diverse meates being
diverse qualities, as where some are hot and moist, some cold and moist, some
hot and dry, some cold and dry, according there unto shall the juice be
divers, which they make in the body. And like as between the said qualities is
contrariety, so thereby shall be in the body an unequal temperature, forasmoch
as it is not possible for man to esteem so just a proporcyon of the qualities
of that, which he receives, that the one shall not exceed the other in
quantity. wherefore of the said unequal mixture, needs must ensue corruption,
consequetly syknesse. And theofore to a hole man, it were better, to fed at
one meal competently on very gross meat only, so that it be sweet, and his
nature do not abhor it, than on diverse fine meates, of sondry substance and
qualities. I have known and scene old men, and old women, which eating only
befe, baken, chese, or curdes, have continued in good helthe, whom I have
provide, that when they have eaten sondry fine meates at one meal, have soon
after felt them self grieved with frettinges and head ache, and after that they
have ben hole again, there hath ben given to them one kind of light meat,
they have done as well therewith, as they were wont to do with gross meates,
when they eat it alone, which proves to be true that which I have rehearsed.
And it is good reason, for after the general opinion of philosophers and
physicians, the nature of mankynde is best content with things most simple
and vnmixte, all things tendynge to unity, wherein is the only perfection.
Also it is a general rule of phisyke, that where a syckenes may be cured with
symples, that is to say, with one only thing, that is medieinable, there
shulde the physician give no copounde medicine myxte with many things.

These things considered, it may seem to all men, that have reason, what abuse
is here in this realm in the continual gourmandyse dayely fedynge on sondry
meates, at one meal, the spirit of gluttony, triumphynge among us is his
gloryouse chariot, called welfare, dryuynge us before him, as his prisoners,
into his dugcon of Glutony.
surfeit, where we are tur^edted with catarres, fevers, goutes, pleuresies,
freitynge of the guts, many other sycknesses, and fynally cruelly put to
death by them, oftentimes in youth, or in the most pleasant time of our life,
when we wold most gladly live. For the remedy whereof, howe many times have
there ben dyuised ordynaunces and acts of counsel, although perchance
bodyly helthe was not the chyefe occasyon thereof, but rather provision against
vain and sumptuous expenses of the mean people. For the nobility was
exempted and had liberty to abide styll in the dungeon, if they would, and to
live lass while than other men: But when, where, and howe lunge were the said
good denyses put in due execution, for all that thereof should succeed double
profit, that is to say, health of body, and increse of substance, by eschewyng
of superfluous expenses in sondry dyshes? Alas how lunge will men fantasy
laws and good ordynaunces, and never determine them. Fantasy proceeds of
wit, dete, mination of wisdom, wit is in the deuysyng and speaking, but
wisdom is in the performance, which rests ouely in execution. Here I had
almost forgotten, that my purpose was to write of the order of diet, and not
of laws, but the fervent love that I have to the public weal of my
country, constrained me to digress somewhat from my matter: but now will I
proceed forth to write of order, which in taking of meates and drynkes, is
not the lest part of diet.

Of order in receiuynge of meat and drink. Cap. 29.
Herbs as well sodden, as vnsodden, also fruits, which do mollyfye and
louse the bealy, ought to be eaten before any other meat, except that
sommetyme for the repressynge of fumosities, rysynge in the heed by much
drinking of wine, raw lettyse, or a cold appull, or the juice of orenges or
lymons may be taken after meals in a little quatitie. More over all brothes,
milk, rear eggs, and meates, which are purposely taken to make the bealye
soluble, would be first eaten. All fruits and other meates, that are styptike
or byndyng, wold be eaten last after all other. Fruits confectionate
specially with honey, are not to be eaten with other meates. But here is it to be
dylygentelye noted, that where the stomach is coleryke and strong, gross
meates wold be first eaten; where the stomach is cold or weak, there wold
fine meates be first eaten: for in a hot stomach, fine meates are bourned,
while the gross meat is digesting. Contrary wise in a cold stomach, the
little heate is suffocate with gross meat, the fine meat left raw, for
lack of concoction, where if the fine meat be first taken moderately, it
stereth up and comfort natural heate, and makes it more able to concoct
gross meates, if they be eat afterward: so that it be but in small quantity.
not withstanding, as I late affirmed, one manner of meat is most sure to every
complerion. foresene that it be always most commonly in conformity of qualities,
with the person that eats. Moreover take heed, that slipper meates be not
first eaten, lest it draw with it to hastily other meates, or they be
digested, nor that stiptik or restraining meatis, be taken at the beginning as
quynces, pears, and medlars, lest they may let other meates, that they
descend not into the bottom of the stomach, where they shulde be digested, not
withstading the cofection made with the juice of quynces, callid Dacitonites,
taken two hours before dinner, or supper, is commended of Galene, and other, for
restoring appetite, and making good concoction. Also cocernyng drink at
meals, it would not be before, that somewhat were eten. And at the beginning the
drink wold be strongest, so toward the end more small, if it be ale or bear, if
it be wine more more alaide with water. And after the better opinion of
phisicions, the drink wold rather be mixte with the meat by sondry little
draughts, than with one great draught at thend of the meal, for the mixture
tempreth well the meat without annoyance, a great draught with much drink,
drowns the meat, rebukes natural hete, that than works in concoction,
with his weight drives down the meat to hastily. Hot wines and sweet, or
cofectioned with spices, or very strong ale or bear, are not convenient at
meals, for the meat is by them rather corrupted, tha digested, they make hot
and stinking vapors ascend up to the brains. All be it if the stomach be very
wyndy, or so cold and feeble, that it can not concoct such a quantity of
meat, as is required to the suffycyent nourishement of the body of him that
eats, or hath eaten raw herbs or fruit, where by he feleth some annoyance,
than may he drink last incontinent after his meal, a little quantity of
secke, or good aqua vite in small ale: but if he have much choler in his
stomach or a heed full of vapours, it were much better, that he did neither
drink the one, nor the other, but rather eat a little colyander sede
prepared, or a piece of a quince roasted, or in marmelade, and after rest, to
amend the lack of nature with sleep, moderate exercise, and players
provided for comfortynge of the stomach. And here will I leave to write any
more of the diet in eating drinking, saving that I wold, that the reders
should have in remembrance these two counsayles. First, that to an hole man, to
precise a rule is not convenient in diet: that the diseases, which do happen
by to much abstinence, are wars to be cured, than they which come by
replecion. Cor. Ccl. li. l. cap. 1.
And as Cornelius Celsus saith, A man that is hole and well at ease, and is at
his liberte, ought not to bind him self to rules, or need a physician: but
yet where the stomach is feeble, as is of I'd, ca. 2.
the more part of citesyns, and well nigh al they that be studious in lernyng
or weighty affairs, there ought to be more circumspection, that the meat may
be such, as that either in quality or quantity, nature being but feeble, but
not rebuked, or to much oppressed.

Of sleep and watch. Cap 30.
THe commodity of moderate sleep, appears by this, that natural heate,
which is occupied about the matter, whereof proceeds nouryshement, is
comforted in the places of digestion, and so digestion is made better, or more
perfect by sleep, the body fatter, the mind more quiet and clear. the humours
temperate: and by much watch all things happen cotrarye. The moderacyon of
sleep must be measured by helthe and syckenesse, by age, by time, by
emptynesse or fullness of the body, and by natural complexions. First to a
hole man, having no devilitie of nature, and digestynge perfytely the meat
that eats, a little sleep is sufficient: but to them, which have weak
stomachs, and do digest slowly, it requires, that sleep be much lengar.
semblable temperance is required in youth and age, winter and summer. The body
being full of ill humours, very little sleep is sufficient, except the humours
be crude or raw, for than is sleep necessary, which digests them better, than
labour. Semblably, where the body is lunge empty, by lunge sycknesse or
abstinence, sleep comfort nature, as well in the principal members, as in
all the other. Also regard must be had to the complexion, for they that are
hot and do eat little, and digest quickly, a little sleep serves,
specyally to choleryke persons, for in them much sleep augments heate, more
than is necessary, whereby hot fumes and inflammations are often engendered, and
sometime the natural choler is aduste or putryfied, as experience teaches.
Fleumatike persons at naturallly inclined to sleep: and because they engender
much humours, they require more sleep than sanguine or choleric. Persons
having natural melancholy, not procedynge of choler aduste, do require very
much sleep, which in them comfort the powers animal, vital, and
natural, which ye may find write in the tables preceding Sleep would be taken
not immediately after meals, and before that the meat is descended from the
mouth of the stomach. For thereby is engendered pains and noise in the belly,
and digestion corrupted, and the sleep by ill vapours, ascendyng, made unquiet
and troublous. More over immoderate sleep makes the body apt unto palseys,
apoplexis, falling sycknes, reumes, impostumes. Also it makes the wits
dull, and the body slow and vnapte to honest exercise. Scmblably immoderate
watch dries to much the body, and doth debilytate the powers animal, lets
digestion, and makes the body apt to consumptions. Wherefore in these two
things, as well as all other, a diligent temperance is to be used the
moderation is best coniected for it is harde perfytely to know it) by the
sensible lightness of all the body, specially of the brain, the brows, and the
eyes, the passage down of the meat from the stomach, the will to make urine,
and to go to the stool. Contrary wise, heuines in the body and eyes, and savor
of the mete before eaten, signifies that the sleep was not sufficient. They
that are hole must sleep first on the right side, because the meat may approach
to the liver, which is to the stomach, as fire under the pot, and by him is
digested. To them, which have feeble digestion, it is good to sleep prostrate
on their bealyes, or to have their bare hand on their stomachs. Lying upright
on the back, is to be utterly abhorred.

The commodity of exercise, and the time when it shulde be used. Cap. 31.
EVery menynge is not an exercise, but only that which is vehement, the end
whereof, is alteration of the breath or wynd of a man Of exercise do proceed two
commodities, evacuation of excremetes, and also good habit of the body. for
exercise being a vehement motion, there of needs must ensue hardness of the
members, whereby labour shall the less grieve, and the body be the more strong
to labour. also thereof comes augmentation of heate, whereby happens the more
attraction of things to be dygested, also more quycke alteration, and better
nourysshynge More over, that al and syngular parts of the body, be therewith
somewhat humected. whereby it happens, that things harde be mollified moist
things are extenuate, and the pores of the body are more opened. And by the
violence of the breath or wynd, the pores are cleansed, and the fylthe in the
body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the preseruatio of
health, that without it, no man may be lunge without sycknesse, which is
affyrmed by Lornelius Lelsus, Cor. Cel. lib. 1.
saying, that sluggyshnes dulls the body, labour doth strength it, the first
brings the in commodities of age shortly, the last makes a man lunge time
lusty. Not withstanding in exercise ought to be four things diligently
considered, that is to say, the time, the things precedyng, the quality and
the quantity of exercise.

First as concerning the time convenient for exercise, that it be not when
there is in the stomach or bowels, great quatitie of meat not suffycyently
dygested, or of humours crude or raw, less thereby peril mought ensue by
conveyance of them into all the members, before those metes Galen. de tuend.
san. lib. 1.
or humours be concocte or boiled suffyeyently. Galen saith, that the time
most convenient for exercise is, when both the first second digestyon is
complete, as well in the stomach, as in the veins, that the time approaches to
eat (...). For if ye do exercise sooner or later, ye shall either fill the
body with crude humours, or else augment yelowe choler. The knowledge of this
time is perceived by the colour of the urine, for that which resebleth unto
clear water betokens, that the juice, which comes from the stomach, is
crude in the veins: that which is well colouryd; not to high or base,
betokens that the second digestion is now perfyte: where the colour is very
high or red, it sygh^fyet^ that the concoction is more than suffycyent.
Wherefore when the vryne appears in a temperate colour, not red nor pale, but
as it were gilt, than shulde exercise have his beginning.

Of fricasies or rubbynges precedynge exercise. Cap. 32.
AS touching things procedynge exercise, for asmoch as it is to be feared,
lest by vehement exercise any of the excreme Galenus. Paulus. Oribasius,
Actius.
tes of the bealy or bladder, shulde hastily be received into the habit of the
body, by the violence of heate, kendled by exercise: also lest (...) thing,
which is hole, be by heuyness^ (...) ^tes, or violent motion, broken or (...)
out of his place, or that the excrementes, by violence of the breathe, shulde
stop the po^res or ^dytes of the body, it shall be necessary little and
little, by chafynge the body, first to mollifye the parts consolydate, and
to ex^te or make thynne the humours, and to louse and open the poores, and than
shall ensue to him that exercises, no peril of obstruction or rupture. And to
bring that to pass, it shall be expedient, after that the body is cleansed, to
rub the body with a course lynnen clothe, first softly and easily, and
after to increase more and more, to a harde and swyfte rubbing, until the
flesh do swell, and be somewhat ruddy, and that not only down right, but
also overthwart round Some do use fricasies in this form, in the morning,
after that they have ben at the stole, with their shirt sleues or bare hand,
if their flesh be tended, they do first softly, and afterward faster, rub
their breast, and sides downward, and ouerthwarte, not touching their
stomach or bealy, and after cause their servant semblably to rub overthwart
their shoulders, and back, beginning at their neckbone, and not touching the
raynes of their back, except they do feel there much cold and wind, and
afterward their legs fro the knees to the ankle: last their arms from the
elbow to the hand wrest. And in this form of fricasy I my self have founded
an excellent commodity. Old men, or they, which be very dry in their bodies,
if they put to some sweet oils, as Yrinum, Nardiu, Chamemelinum, or other
like, myxte with a little sweet oil of rooses, I suppose they do well. I will not
here speak of oyntementes used in ode time among the Romaynes and Greeks, in
frie^ or rubbynges. For I suppose, that they were never here used. and in the
said places, they be also left, onelesse it be in palsies, or apoplexies, or
against the rigour, which happens in fevers, only. I will remember the saying
of Hipocrates, Fricasye has power to louse, to bind, to increase flesh,
and to mynysshe hit. For harde fryeasies do bind or consolidate, soft
rubbing doth louse or mollyfye, much doth mynyshe flesh, mean rubbing
doth augment or increase it. He that will know more abundantly hereof, let
him rede the book of Galene of the preservation of health, called in latyne
Detuenda sanitate, translated most truly and eloquentely, out of Greek into
latin, by doctor Linacre, late physician of most worthy memory to our
soueraygne lord king Henry the eight. The same mattier is written more
briefly of Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius and some other late wryters, but
unto Galene not to be compared.

The diversities of exercises. Cap. 33.
THe quality of exercise, is the dyuersytie thereof, forasmoche as therein be
many differences in mouynge, and also some exercise moves more one part of
the body, some another. In difference of mouynge, some is slow or soft, some
is swyfte or fast: some is strong or violent, some be myxte with strength
swiftness. Strong or violent exercises be these, deluyng (specially in tough
clay and heavy) bearing or susteynynge of heavy burdeynes, clymmyng or walking
against a steep upright hill: holding a rope, clymmyng up thereby, hanging by
the hands on any thing, above a man reach, that his fete touche not the
ground: standing and holding up, or spreadynge the arms, with the hands
fast closed, and abiding so a lunge time. Also to hold the arms stedfaste,
causynge an other man, to assay, to pull them out, and not withstanding he
kepeth his arm stedfaste, inforcynge thereunto the synewes and muscles.
wrastlynge also with the arms and legs, if the persons be equal in
strength, it doth exercise the one and the other: if the one be stronger,
than is it to the weaker a more violent exercise. All these kinds of
exercises, and other like them, do augment strength, and therefore they serve
only for yonge men, which be inclined, or be apt to the wars. Swyfte
exercise without violence is, runnynge, playenge with weapons, tenyse, or
throwynge of the balle, trottyng a space of ground forward and backward,
going on the toes, and holding up the hands. Also styrrynge up and down
his arms, without plummettes. Vehement exercise is compound of violent
exercise, and swyfte, when they are joined together at oone time, as daunsynge
of galyardes, throwynge of the balle, and rounnynge after it: footeballe play
may be in the number thereof, throwynge of the lunge dart, and contynuynge it
many times, ronnynge in harness, and other like.

The moderate exercise is lunge walking or going a journey. The parts of the
body have sondry exercises appropryed unto them, as runnynge and going is the
most proper for the legs. Mouynge of the arms up and down, of stretchynge
them out, and playenge with weapons, serves most for the arms and shulders,
stoupynge and rysynge oftentyme, or lyftynge great weightes, taking up
plummettes or other like poyses on the ends of staves, and in like wise,
lyftyng up in every hand a spear or mortspyke by the ends, specyallye
crossynge the hands, and to lay them down again in their places, these do
exercise the back and loins. Of the bulk and lunges the proper exercise is
meuynge of the breathe in singing or cryenge. The entrails, which be
vndernethe the myddreffe, be exercysed by blowynge, either by constraynte, or
playenge on Shaulmes, or Sackbottes, or other like instruments, which do
require much wind. The Musc^les are best exercysed with holding the breath
in, a lunge time, so that he which doth exercise, hath well dygested his
meat, and is not troubled with much wind in his body. Fynally load
redynge, counterfeit battle, tenyse, or throwynge the balle, runnynge,
walking, Celsus. 1.
add to shotyng, which in mine opinion exceed all the other, do exercise the
body commodiousely. Always remember, that the end of violent exercise, is
difficulty in fetching of the brethe. Of moderate exercise, alteratio of
breath only, or the beginning of sweat. More over in winter, runnynge, and
wrastlynge, is convenient. In summer wrastlynge a little, but not runnynge. In
very cold whether, much walking, in hot whether, rest is more expedyent. They
which seem to have moyste bodies, and live in ydelnesse, they have need of
violent exercyse^ They which at lean and choleryke, must walk softly, and
exercise them selfes very temperatly. The plummettes, called of Galen Alteres,
which are now much used with great men, being of equal weight, and
according to the strength of him, that exercises, are very good to be used
fasting, a little before brekefaste or dinner, holding in every hand one
plummet, and lyftynge them on high, and bringing them down with much
violence, and so he may make the exercise violent, or moderate, after the
poise of the plummettes, heuyer or lighter, and with much or little
labourynge with them.

Of Gestation, that is to say, where one is carried, and is of an other thing
meued, and not of him self. Cap. 34.
THere is also an other kind of exercise, which is called Gestation, and is
myxte with mouynge and rest. For as much as Paul. (...). Actius.
the body, syttyng or lying, seems to rest, and not withstanding it is meued
by that, which bears it, as lyenge in a bed, having by cords or chains,
or in a cradell, syttinge in a chair, which is carried on men's shulders with
staves, as was the use of the aucient Romayns or sitting in a boot or barge,
which is rowed, riding on a horse, which aumbleth very easily, or goth a
very soft pace. The bed, cradel, and chair carried, serves for them, that
are in lunge and continual syckenesse, or be lately recovered of a fever Also
them, which have the frenesye or letarge, or have a lyghte terciane fever, or
a cotidiane. This exercise sweetly asswageth troubles of the mind, and
provokes sleep, as it appears in chylderne, which are rocked. Also it is
convenient for them, which have the palsy, the stoone, or the gout.
Gestation in a charyotte or wagon hath in it a shaking of the body, but some
vehement, and some more soft, the soft serves in dyseases of the head, and
where any matter runs down into the stomach and entrails. But the vehement
shaking is to be used in the griefs of the breast and stomach. Also in
swelling of the body and legs in dropsies, palseys, mygrimes, and scotomies,
which is an imagination of darkness, being retoutned, at the end of his
journey, he must sit up, and be easily moved. I have known, saith Aetius,
many persons in such wise cured without any other help. Navigation or rowing
nigh to the land, in a claim water, is expediet for them that have dropsies,
lepries, palsepes, called of the vulgar people, takynges, and fransies. To be
carried on a rough water, it is a violent exercise, induces sondry affections
of the mind, sometime fear, sometime hope, now coward heart, now hardiness,
one while pleasure, an another while displeasure. These exercises, if they be
well tempered, they may put out of the body, all lunge during syckenesses.
For that which is myxte with rest and menynge, if any thing else may, it
most excellently causes the body to be well nourished. Celsus, Celsus. 2.
doth prohybite gestation, where the body feleth peyne, in the beginning of
fevers, but when they cease, he aloweth it.

Riding moderately, and without gryefe, it doth corroborate the spyrite and
body above other exercises, specyally the stomach, it cleanses the senses, and
makes them more quycke: all be it to the breast it is very noyfull. It ought
to be remembered, that as well this, as all other kinds of exercise, wold be
used in a hole country, and where the air is pure and uncorrupted. Foresene,
that he that woll exercise, do go first to the stool, for the causes rehearsed
in the last chapiter.

Of vociferation. Cap. 35.
THe chief exercise of the breast and instruments of the voice, is
vociferacion, which is synging, redyng, or crienge, whereof is the property,
that it purges natural heate, and makes it also subtle and stable, and
makes the members of the body substancyall and strong, resystynge diseases.
This exercise wold be used, of persons short wynded, and them, which can
not fetch their brethe, but holding their neck straight upright. Also of
them, whose flesh is consumed, specially about the breast and shoulders.
also which have had apostume^ broken in their breasts: moreover of them that
are hoorse by the much moisture. and to them, which have quartene fevers, it
is convenient, it louseth the humour, that stycketh in the breast, and dries up
the moystenesse of the stomach, which properly the course of the quartayne is
wont to bring with him, it also profits them which have feeble stomachs, or
do vomyte continually, or do break up sowrenesse out of the stomach. It is
good also for grefes of the heed. He that intends to attempt this exercise,
after that he hath ben at the stool, and softly rubbed the lower parts, and
washed his hands. Let him speak with as base a voice as he can, and
walking, begin to singe louder louder, but styll in a base voice, and to
take no heed of sweet tunes or armonye. For that nothing doth profit unto
helthe of the body, but to enforce him self to singe great, for thereby much
air drawn in by fetching of breath, thrustyth forth the breast and stomach,
and opens and enlarges the poores. By high crienge and load reading, are
expellyd superfluouse humours. Therefore me^e and women, having their bodies
feeble, and their flesh louse, and not fyrme, must read oftentimes load,
and in a baase voice, extendynde out the wind pipe, and other passages of the
breathe.

But notwithstanding, this exercise is not used always, and of all persons. For
they in whom is abundance of humours corrupted, or be much diseased with
crudite in the stomach and veins, those do I counsel, to abstain from the
exercise of the voice, lest much corrupts juice or vapours, may thereby be
into all the body dystrybuted. And here I conclude to speak of exercise,
which of them, that desire, to remain lunge in health, is most diligently, as
I mought say, most scrupulousely to be observed.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Of replecion. Cap. 1.
REPLECION IS A superfluous abundance of humours in the body: and that is in
two manner of wise, that is to say in quatitie, in quality. In quantity, as
where al the four humours are more in abundance, that be equalle in proporcion
to the body, that conteyneth them, or where one humour much excedeth the
remnant in quantity. In qualytie, as where the blood or other humour, is
hotter, or colder, thycker or thynner, that is convenient unto the body. First
where all the humours, being superfluousely increased, fylleth and extends
the receptories of the body, as the stomach, the veins, and bowels, and is
most properly callid fullness, in greek Plethora, in latin Plenitudo.

The other is where the body is infarced, either with choler, yelowe or black,
or with fleume, or with watery humours, and is properly called in greek,
Cacochymia, in latin Viciosus succus, in english it may be callid corrupt
juice. I will not here write, the subtle and abundant definitions and
descriptions of Galen in his books de Plenitudine, and in his commentaries
upon the aphorssmes of hipocrates. For it shall here suffyse, to show the
operations of replecion good or ill, rymyttynge them, which be curious, and
desire a more ample declaration, to the most excellent warkes of Galene, where
he may be satisfied, Li. (...). aph.
if he be not determined to repougne against reason. Hipocrates says, where
meat Apho. 15. Vbi cibus praeter na tura plus igestus est hic morbu facit.
Galen. in come. lopraedicto.
is received much above nature, that makethe syckenesse. Galene declarynge
that place saith, More meat than accords with natures measure, is named
replecion. And afterward he expounds that word above nature, to signify to
much and superfluously as who saith, where the meat is superfluously taken, it
makes sickness. For meat but a little excedynge temperance, may not forthwith
make syckenesse, but may yet keep the body within the latitude or bounds of
helthe, for the meat that shall make syckenes, must not a little exceed the
exquisite measure. The incommodity, which happens thereby is, that moystnesse
is to much extended. and natural heate is debilitate. Also naturalle heate
resolves somewhat of the superfluouse meat and drink. And of that, which is
resolved of meat vndigested, proceeds fumosytie gross and vndygested, which
ascendynge up into the heed, and touching the rhyme, wherein the brain is
wrapped, causes heed ache, trembling of the members, duskyshnes of the sight,
and many other sycknesses: also by the sharpnes thereof, it prycketh and
annoys the synewes, which make sensibilitie, the roots of whom, are in the
brayn, and from thence passes through all the body. Fynally, the said
fumositie, engendered of repletion, percynge the innermost part of the said
synewes, called sensible, it grievously annoys the power animal, there
consystynge, by the occasion whereof, understanding and reason, as to the use of
them, are let and troubled. And also the tongue, which is reasons exposytour,
is depryued of his office, as it appears in them, which are drunk, and them,
which have grievous pains in their heed, proceeding of replecion. Signs of
replecion be these, loss of appetite, delight in nothing, slouthfulnesse,
dullness of the wit, and senses, more sleep, than Oribasius Euporisto lib.
(...).
was accustomed to be, cramps in the body, ster tynge or saltion of the
members, fullness of the veins, and thyckenes of the pulsis, horror or
shrouelynge of the body myxte with heate. The remedies are abstynence, and all
euacuations, whereof I will make mention in the next Chapyter.

Of euacuacion. Cap. 2.
THe meates and drynkes received into the body, if the stomach and liver do
their natural office, be altered by concoction and digestion, in such wise
that the best part thereof goth to the nouryshment of the body: the warste,
being separate by the members official, from the residue, are made
excrementes in sondry forms, and substances, which ar^ like in quality to
the natural humour, which than raygneth most in the body. These excrementes
Excrementes.
be none other, but matter superfluous, and unsavoury, which by natural powers
may not be converted into flesh, but remaining in the body corrupt the
members, and therefore nature abhorrynge them, desires to have them
expels. These excrementes be three in number, ordure, urine, humour
superfluouse. More over Ordure.
there be two sorts of ordure, that is to say, one digested, which passes by
siege, the other vndygested, Dygestyd.
which is expelled by vomyte. where I say dygested, I mean, that it is
passed the stomach, and turned into an another figure. Like wise I call that
vndigested, which styll retains the figure of meat. Urine is the watery
Urine
substance of the blood, like as whaye is of milk, which out of the meat
that is altered and concocte or boiled in the stomach, is strained in the
veins called Mesaraice, which proceeds from the holowe part of the liver,
and sent by the raynes into the bladder, passethe by the Instrument, the
which is ordained as well to that purpose, as for Generation.

Humour superfluouse is in three sorts, either Humour superfluous.
myxte with any of the four humours, called natural, or else it is gathered
into the brain, or it is between the skin and the flesh, or lies among
the synewes, Muscules or joints. Of humours some are more gross and cold,
some are subtle and hot, and are called vapour^. Now for to expelle the said
excrementes, are.ix. sondry kinds of evacuation, that is to say, abstynence,
vomyte, purgation by siege, lettynge of blood, scarifienge called cuppynge,
sweating, provocation of urine, spyttynge, bledyng at the nose, or by
hemorrodes: And in women, their natural purgations. Of these euacuations I wy^
briefly declare, with the commodities, which by the discrets use of them do
happen unto the body.

Of abstinence. Cap. 3.
ABstinence is a forbearynge to receive any meat or drink. For if it be but
in part, it is than called rather temperance than abstinence. It ought to be
used only after replecion, as the proper remedy therefore. And than if it be
moderate, it consumes superfluities, Cel. lib. (...). Hipocrat. apho. li. 7.
and in consumynge them, it clarifies the humours, makes the body fair
coloured, and not only kepeth out syckenesse, but also where sychenesse is
entered, nothing more helps, if it be used in season. To them, which have
very moyste bodies, hunger is right expediente, for Considerations in
abstinence.
it makes theyin more dry, not withstanding there ought to be
consyderations, in the meat before eaten, in the age of the person, in the
time of the year, and in custom. First in the meat before eaten, if it be
much in excess or very gross, or not much excedynge, or lyghte of
digestyon, and according thereto, would abstynence more or lass be
proporcioned. Concerning age, Hipocrates says, old men may sustain Apho.
li. 1.
fasting easily: next unto them, men of myddell age, yonge men may wars
bear it, chylderne warst of all, specially they that be lusty, not
withandynge, here Galene corrects Hipocrates, saying, that he should have
excepted men Galen. in comment.
very old, who, as experience declares, must eat often and little. As
touching time, it must be remembered, that in winter and spring time, the
stomachs be naturally veeye hot, and sleep is lunge, and therefore in that
time meates would be more abundant, all though much be eaten, it will be
sooner digested. wherefore abstinence woide not be than so much as in summer,
all be it to absteyne much in summer, except it be after replecion. Damascene
saith, it dries the body, it makes the colour Damaseenus apho.
salowe, it engenders melancholy, and hurts the syghte. More over, custom
may not be forgotten, for they, which are used from chyldhode, to eat sondry
meals in the day, would rather be reduced to fewer meals, and lyttelle
meat, than to be compelled to abstaynevtterly, to the intent, that nature,
which is made by custom, be not rebuked, and the power digestyue thereby
debilitate. And note well, that by to much abstinence, the moisture of the
body is withdraw and consequentely the body dries, and waxes lean: natural
heate, by withdrawynge of moisture, is to much intended, and not finding
humour to warke in, turns his violence to the radical or substantial
moisture of the body. and exhaustyng that humour, brings the body into a
consumption. wherefore Hipocrates saith, Apho. li. (...)
that to scarce and exquisite an order in meat and drink, is for the more
part more dangerous than that, which is more abundant. Contrarywyse
moderation in abstinence, according to the said consyderatyons, is to helthe a
sure bulwark.

Of Vomit. Cap. 4.
THe meat or drink superfluous, or corrupted in the stomach, is best expellyd
by vomyte, if it be not very grievous to him which is diseased. Also the
moderate Aetius. li. 1
use of it, pourgeth fleume, lights the heed, causes that the excess of
meates or drynkes, shall not annoy or bring syckenesse. Moreover it amedeth the
affectis of the raynes, bladder, and the fundement. It also helps against
lepries, cankers, goutes, dropsies, and also diverse sicknesses proceeding of the
stomach. For-yf any grefs happens of the head, vomyte is than vncommodyous. It
is better in winter, than in summer. Also good for them, which are replete, or
very choleryke, if tkey have not well dygested. but it is ill for them, that
be lean, or have weak stomachs. And therefore where one feleth bitter vapours
rysynge out of his stomach, with grief and weyghtynesse, in the over parts
of his body, let him room forthwith to this remedy. It is also good for
him that is hart burned, and harh much spyttell, or his stomach wambleth, and
for him that remeueth into sondrye places. Yet I coumsaye saith Celsus, him
that will be Cells. lib. 1.
in helthe, and wold not be to soon aged, that he use not this daily. And I my
self have (...) men, which daily vsynge it have brought thereby their stomachs
into such custom, that what so ever they did eete, they could not lunge
retain it, whereby they shorten their lives. wherefore it would not be used, but
only where great surfeit, or abundance of fleume do require it. He that will
vomyte after meat, let him drink sondry drynkes myxte together, and last of
all, warm water: or if that be to easy, let him myxt therewith salt or honey.
If he will vomyte fasting, let him drink water and honey sodden together, or
ysope with it, or eat of a radyshe root, and drink warm water upon it.
also water wherein radyshe is boiled, and afterward provoke him self to it,
Them that will have more violent pourgations, I remytte to physicians learned.
But yet I do eftsoon warn them, that therein they be circumspect, and do not
much use it. More over in vomits, the matter brought forth, would be
considered, according to the rules of Hipocrates, in his second Hipocrat.
praesag. 2. cap. 7.
book of pronostications, that is to say, if it be myxt with fleume choler, it
is most profitable if it be not in very great quantity, nor thycke, the lass
myxture it hath, the wars is it. If it be green, like to leek blaades,
thynne or black, it is to be judged ylle. If it have all colours, it is
extreme peryllous. If it be lady coloured, and savours horribly, it
signifies a short abolicion, or dissolution of nature. For as Galene affirms
there in his comment, such manner of vomit declares corruption with
extinctinge of nature. Also every putrified and stynckynge savour in vomyte is
ill. These things be right Galen. de locis. affectis. lib. 1.
necessary, to be looked for, where one doth vomyte without any difficulty:
but to enforce one to vomit, which can not, is very odious, and to be
abhorred.

wels, grief in the raynes of the back or huckle bone, ventosities in the
bealy, inflammation or exulceration in the guts or bladder. It is a convenient
and sure medicine, and left hurt doth ensue of it. The making and ordrynge
thereof, I will omytte to write in this place, partly that I would not, that
physicians should to much note in me presumption, partly that another place may
be more apt to that purpose.

The particular commodities of every purgation. Cap. 6.
IN potions, electuaries, and pylles ought to be much more observation, than
in clysters or suppositories, forasmoch as these do enter no further than into
the gut, where the ordure lies, and by that place only, brings forth the
matter, which causes disease. But the other entering in that way, that meates
and drynkes do, comes into the stomach, and there is boiled, and sent into
the places of digestyon, and afterward is myxte with the juice, whereof the
substance of the body is made, and expellynge the adversary humours, sommewhat
thereof doubtelesse remains in the body. Wherefore men have need to
beware, what medicynes they receive, that in them be no venenosytie, malice or
corruption, lest for the expellynge of a superfluous humour, which perchance
good diet, or some brothes made of good herbs, or the said evacuation, with
suppositorie or clister, mought bring forth at leisure. by desiring of to
hasty remedy, they receive in medicine that which shall engender a venomous
humour, and vneuitable destruction unto all the body. And therefore happy is
he, which in syckenesse finds a discrete and well learned physician, and so
true a potycarye, that hath always drowges uncorrupted, and whom the
physician may surely trust, to dispense his things truly. But now to
return to the said form of pourgation, I will now set forth sum
counsayles, concerning that mattier, which I have collected out of the chief
authors of phisycke. Bodies hot and moyste, may easily sustain pourgation
by the stool. They which be lean or thynne, having the members tender, may
take harm by purgations. To men that are choleric, and them that eat
lyttelle, pourgations are greuouse. In yonge chylderne and old men, it is
dangerous to louse much the bealye. To them that are not wont to it,
pourgation is noyfulle. He that lives in a good order of diet needs neither
pourgation nor vomyte. After that the pourgation has wrought, thyrstnes and
sound sleep be signs that the body is sufficiently pourged. By daily taking
of medicynes, nature is corrupted. when ye will purge any thing make first
the matter flowynge soluble. Medicine to pourge Hipocrat aphor.
oughe not to be mingled with meat, but to be taken four hours at the lest
before meals, or three hours after meals, except certain easy pylles made
to cleanse and comfort the stomach, which would be taken at the beginning of
supper, or after supper a little before that one goes to bed, making a
lyghte supper or none. After purgation taken, the pacyent shulde rest, not
walk, until the medicine hath wrought, nor eat or dryncke in the mean
space. These things have I remembered, because I have known right good
physicians, to have forgotten, to instruct thereof their pacietes. Now will I
set forth the table of such things, which of their property do digest or
pourge superfluous humours particularly, which I have gathered out of the
books of Dioscorides, Galene, Paulus Egineta, Oribasius, and Aetius, and other
late wryters, not withstanding, I have not written all, for as much as there
be diverse things, whereunto we have not yet founden any names in englyshe.

Digestiues of choler.
Endyue. Lettyse. Cykorye. Scabiose. Maydenheare. Malowes. Mercury. The juice
of pome^ garnades. Pourselane. Popy. Berberies. Roses. Violettes the lefe and
flower. Sorrel. Lyuerworte. Sorrel de boyse. Why clarifyed. The great four
cold sedes, that is to say, of gourdes, cucumbers, melones, and citruls.
Psilium, Vyneger. Saunders. Barley water. Prunes. Tamaryndes.
Purges of choler.
Wild hoppes. Wormewode Centorie. Fumytorie. Why of butter. Violettes.
Mercury. Juycs of Roses Prunes. Eupatorye. Tamarindes, half an ounce in a
decoction. Manna.vi. drammes at the least, and so to xxv. in the broth of a
hen or capon. Rebarbaru by it self frome two drammes, unto four, infused or
stiped in lycour, frome iiii. drames unto.viii.
Digestyues of fleume.
Fenell, Persely, the roots Smallage. Capers. Laurel. Synuy. Puly. Maioram.
Penyroyall. Wild parsnyp sede. Mynt. Pympepnell. Horemynt. Gladen. Agrymonye.
Calamynt. Nep. Betayne. Sauge. Radyshe. Mugworte. Junyper. Hysope. Pyony.
Balm. Honey. Gynger. Squilla. Aristolochia. Cynamome. Pepper. Cumyne.
Pourges of fleume.
Centorie. Nettyll. Agrimonye. Alder. Polypodiu of the oak. Myrabolani kebuli,
infused frome half an ounce to an ounce, and two drammes. In substance, frome
two drammes to half an ounce. Agaricus, fro a drame to two drammes, infused
from.ii. drames to five. Yreos. Maydenheare. Sticados.
Pourges of melancholy.
The broth of colewortes, light boiled. Balm mynte. Sticados. Time. Seen,
boiled in white wine, or in the broth of a hen. Lased sauery. Exthimus.
Unwrought sylke. Organum. Calamynt. Borage. Hartis tunge. Quyckbeme.
Maydenheare. Wythwynde. Pulyall mountain. Honey. Sugar.
Melancholy for the thynnesse and subtylnesse of the humour, needs no
digestiue.

They which will take sharper purgations, or compound with divers things,
let them take the counsel of an honest and perfyte phisytion, and not
adventure to myxte things together, without knowing the temperance of them
in degrees, and that he canne proporcion them to the body, that shall receive
them in symples, as they be written. And so he may use them without peril,
against the humours, whereunto they serve.

Lettynge of blood. Cap. 6.
THe part of Evacuation by lettynge of blood, is incisyon or cuttynge of the
vain, whereby the blood, which is cause of syckenesse or grief to the hole
body, or any partycular part thereof, doth most aptly pass. The commodities
whereof, being in a moderate Arnold (...) de uillano^ ua.
quantity, and in a due time taken, be these that follow, it clarifies the
wit, and makes good memory, it cleanses the bladder, it dries the brain, it
warms the marowe, being in the bones, it opens the hearing, it stops
tears or droppynges of the even, it takes away lothsomnesse, and confirms
the stomach, it nourishes that, which is proper to nature, and the contrary
expels. It is thought, that thereby life is prolonged, and the matter making
sycknesse shortly consumed. Wherefore lettynge of Oribasi^ in medicine comp^
dio.
blood is not only expedient for them, which are fulle of blood, or have
abundance of strength, but also for them, in whom, without plenitude,
called fullness, inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by some
outewarde struck, the blood being gathered within, by collection thereof,
do feel grief or disease. Also where there is much peyne felt, or
debylitie of some member, whereof is supposed to be engendered some grievous
disease. More over they, which use excess of meates and drynkes, may be cured
by lettynge of blood. But those, which be temperate, keeping good diet, be
helped without lettynge of blode: as by fricasies, vsynge of bathes, exercise,
walking, and riding moderately. Alsoo vnctions with oils and oyntementes,
called Diaphoretice, which by evaporation, do shortly evacuate the fullness.
All be it, if the fullness be of melancholy blood, than always needs must be
lettynge of blood. Abundance of melancholy blood is known by these signs.
There is felt in the entrails, or within the boulke of a man or woman, a
weyghtynes with tension or thrustynge outward and all that part, which is
above the navel, is more heavy, than it was wont to be. Also much urine and
fatty, the residence or bo^ome, thycke, troublous, and fat, sommetyme black
poushes or boils, with inflammation and much peyne. These must be shortly let
blood, and the melancholy humour also purged by siege They, which have crude
or raw humours, must be warily let blood, before that sycknesse
engender, but having the fever, in no wise. Concerning lettynge of blonde,
these things Aetius. li. 3
following, would be had in continual remembrance, and be before thought on. In
abundance of the blood, the quality and quantity, the greatness of the
sycknes, and if it be present, or looked for. also the diet precedyng, the age
and strength of the person, the natural form of his body, the time of the
year, the region or country, the present state of the air, the disvse of
accustomed exercise, the ceassynge of euacuations used before. In quality
consider, of what humour the fulness proceeds. In quantity the abundance of
that, which is to be pourged. In syckenesse, if it be dangerous or tolerable:
if the sycknesse be present, it requires the more diligence: if it be looked
for, it may be the better proporcioned. Cor. Celsus. lib. 2.
In diet, the custom in earynge and drinking, must be specially noted. In
yonge men and women, lettynge of blood would be more liberal. In old men
and yonge chylderne, it would be scarser: strong men may sustain bledynge,
they which are feeble, may not endure it: Large bodies have greatter vessels,
than they, which be little. lean me have more blod, corporat men have more
flesh. The time of the year must be specially marked. For in the beginning of
Oriba. s^Arnold. deuilla nova de flobothomia. Io. Damascenus in art medi.
spring time, it is best lettynge of blood, as Oribasius says, and so
doth continue, after the opinion of Arnolde, unto the eight calendes of June.
Aetius affirms, that in winter, or in a cold country, or where the person
is of a very cold nature, the veins should not be opened. And Damascene saith,
They which in youth have use to be much let blood, after they be three
score years old, their nature waxes cold, and natural heate is in them
suffocate, specially if they were of a cold complexion. but that is to be
understand, where they that are in health, are often let blood. For in the
lapse from health, and in divers diseases, wherein, the blood is corrupted, or
where it engenders impostumes, or resorts to any place, where it ought not
to be, or passes by any other cundyte, than nature hath ordained, or where it
is furyouse or inflamed, or by any other means bredethe greuouse diseases, in
all these cases it ought to be practysed, ye sometime in aged persons, women
with child, and young infantes. For in extreme necessity, it were better
experience some remedy, than to do nothing. All other things concerning this
matter, pertain to the part curatyue, which treats of healynge of
sycknesse, whereof I will not now speak, but remytte the reders to the
counsel of discrete physicians.

Of scarifienge called boxinge or cuppynge. Cap. 7.
FOr as much as it is not convenient, to be let blood often times in the
year, because much of the vital spirit passes forth with ^alenus
the blood, which being exhaust, the body waxes cold, and natural
operations become (...). li. 3
the more feeble, I therefore do counsel (says Galene) that the base parts
of the body, as the legs, be scarified, which is the most sure remedy, as
well in conceruynge heithe as in repairynge thereof, being decayed. For it
cures the even being annoyed with lunge distillations. It profyteth also to
the heed, and over part of the body, against sondry diseases. In what member
the blood is gathered, the body being first purged by scarification, the
grefe may be cured. Also Oribasius affirms the same, and also adds
Oribasius sin medici^ copen.
thereto, that it helps squynances, or quinces in the throat, and dissolveth
the constipations or stoppynges made of all places, if the places be scarified:
not withstanding applicacion of boxes about the stomach, in hot fevers, where
reason is troubled, are to be eschued, for fear of suffocatio. Likewise put to
the heed undiscreetly, Aetius.
it hurts both the heed the eyes. The late authors do affirm, that
scarifieng is in the stead of lettynge blood, where for age, debility, or
time of the year, or other like consyderation, a man may not sustain blood
lettinge, and it brings forth the thynne blood, which is next to the skyn.

Of blood suckers or leaches. Cap. 8.
THere is also an other form of evacuation by worms, found in waters called
blood suckers or leaches, which being put unto the body or member, do draw
out blode. And their drawing is more convenient for fullness of blood than
scarifyenge is, forasmoche as they fetch blood more deper, and is more of the
substance of blood, yet the opinion of some men is, that they do draw no
blood but that, which is corrupted, and not proporcionable unto our body. And
therefore in griefs, which happen between the skin and the flesh of blode
corrupted, these are more convenient than scarifienge. But before that they be
put unto any Oribasius in medicinae copen.
part of the body, they must be first kept all one day before, gyuyng unto
them a little blode in fresh flesh. And than put them in clean water,
somewhat warm, and with a spounge wipe away the slyme, which is about them,
and than lay a little blood on the place grieved, and put them than to
it, and lay on them a spounge, than when they be fulle, they may fall away.
or if pe will sooner have them of, put a horse hear between their mouths,
and the place, and draw them away, or put to their mouths salt or ashes,
or vyneger, and (...)

heate them, and disturbs reason, where the bodies be hot before, where
natural heate is feeble, the heate may not be dispersed unto the extreme parts,
and than doth the extreme members, that is to say, which are far from the
heart, remain cold and trembling. Of this affection comes sometime fevers,
sometime apoplexies, or privation of sencis, trembling, palseys, madness,
fransies, deformity of visage: and that wars is, outrageous swearynge,
blasphemy, desire of vengeance, loss of charity, ainitie, credence, also
forgetfulness of benefytte precedynge, and of obedience, duytie, and
reverence. There also do succeed contention, chargeable suite, vnquietnes of
mind, lack of appetite, lack of sleep, feeble digestion, scorn, dysdayne,
and hatred of other, with peril of losing of all good reputation. These
incomodities of Ire, perfitely had in remembrance, and at the first motion
thereof one of them thoughts on, may happen to bring in his fellows, and thereby
the flame may be quenched. or let him that is angry, even at the first
consider one of these things, that like as he is a man, so is also the other,
with whom he is angry, and therefore it is as lefulle for the other to be
angry, as unto him, and if he so be, than shall that anger be to him
displesant, and stere him more to be angry whereby it appears, that Ire is to
him loathsome. If the other be pactent, than let him abhor that thing in him
self, the lack whereof, in the other contents him, and asswageth his malice.
More over, let him before, that occasion of Ire doth happen, accustom him
self to behold, and mark well them that be angry, with the success of that
anger, and ruminate is in his mind, a good space after. And in that time, let
him remember, howe Christ, the some of god and God, who (as he him self said)
mought have had of god his father, if he would have asked them, legions of
angels, to have defended him, ye with lass tha a wink moughs have slain all
his adversaries, yet he not withstanding, rebuked, scorned, falsely accused,
plucked hither and thither, stryped, bounden with halters, whipped, spit on,
buffets, crowned with sharpe thorne, laded with a heavy piece of timber, his
own proper tourmente, halyd, and vryuen forth like a calfe to the slaughter
house, eftesoones beaten and overthrown, retched, forthewith ropes, arms and
legs laid on the Cross, and there unto with lunge iron nails through the
hands and feet nailed, with many strookes of hammers, with many pryckynges,
or ever the nails moughte pierce by his tender and most blessed flesh and
synewes, quyte through the harde timber, up to the heeds of the nails, and
all this being done for the offence of mankynde, and not his: yet with the
men, which did it, his most unkind countrymen, his most unnatural
kynnesmenne whom he first made of nothing, preserved by miracles, delivered
from perylles, and cured of dyscases, in all his vexation and trouble, he was
never seen or perceived angry. If one will say, that anger is natural, let
hyn: also consider that in Chrystes manhood, were all naturalle pomers. If he
will say, that Ire is token of courage, and in Christ it lacked not, whom
both angels and devils trembled and feared. The premysses often revolved, and
borne in the mind, I will not say, shall utterly extinct all motions of
wrath, which is not possible, but it shall, when it kyndleth lightly, repress
it, and let that it shall not grow into flame. And in speaking here of wrath,
I do not mean that, which good men have against vices: or wise and discrete
governors and masters, against the defautes or negligences of their
subjects of servants, used in rebukyng them, or moderately punysshyng them.
For that is not properly ire, but rather to be called displeasure, and is that
whereof god speaks, by his prophet Dauyd saying. Be you angry do not sin.
And that Psal. 4. Genes. 35. Exod. 32. Leuit. 10 Marc. 11.
manner of anger, hath ben in divers holy men, prophets, and other. And it
appeared in Christ when he drove out them, which made their market in the
holy temple of god, where there ought to be nothing but prayer. And in like wise
when he rebuked the hypocrites But if none of these things may come so shortly
to his remebrauce, that is meued with anger, at the lest let him think on
the lesson, that Apollodorus the philosopher taught to the Emperor Octauian,
that before he speak or do any thing in anger he do recite in order, al the
letters of the A, B, C, remove somewhat out of the place, that he is in, and
seek occasyon to be otherwise occupied. This shall for this time suffyse, for
the remedies of Ire. And he that will know more of this matter, let him read in
my warke, called the Governor, where I thereof do write more abundantly.

Of dolor or heuinesse of mind. Capitulo. 12.
THere is no thing more ennemy to life, then sorrow, called also heuenesse,
for it exhausts both natural heate and moisture of the body, and doth
extenuate or make the body lean, dulls the wit, and darkneth the spirits,
lets the use and iugement of reason, and oppressed memory. And Salomon
says, Pro. 17. 25. Ecclesiast^ 25. 33.
that sorrow dries up the bones. And also like as the mouth in the garment,
and the wourme in the tree, so doth heuynesse annoy the heart of a man. Also
in the book called Ecclesiasticus, Sorrow has killed many, and in it self
is found no commodity. Also by heuynesse death is hastened, it hydeth virtue
or strength, and heuynesse of heart bows down the neck.

This is so puissant an ennemye to nature and bodyly helthe, that to resyste
the malice and violence thereof, are required remedies, as well of the wholesome
counsayles found in holy scripture in the books of moral doctrine. As also of
certain herbs, fruits, and spices, having the property to expelle
melancalyke humours, and to comfort and keep lively the spirits, which have
their proper habitation in the hart of ma, and moderate nouryshyng of the
natural heate and humour, called radical, which is the base or foundation,
whereupon the life of manne stands, and that faylyng, life falls in ruin,
and the body is dissolved. Now first I will declare some remedies against
sorowfulnesse of heart, concerning necessary counsel.

Sometime this affect happens of Ingratitude, either wherefore benefyte, or
specialle love employed, one receives damage, or is abandoned in his
necessite, or is deceived of him, whom he trusted, or finds him, of whom he
has great expectation, forgetful or neglygent in his commodity, or
perceives the person, whom of lunge time he hath loved, to be estranged
from him, or to have one of later acquaintance in more estimation. This
affection nyppeth the heart, ye of most wise men, for they love most heartily,
not provoked by carnalle affection, but rather by good opinion, engendered by
similitude of honest studies, and virtuous manners of long time mutually
experienced. And it is not only unto man grievous, but also unto god most
displeasant and odiouse, as it is abundantly declared in scripture. wherefore
the person, which feleth him self touched with this affect, before that it
grow into a passion, and waxes a sycknesse, let him call to remembrance
these articles following, or at the lest ways sum of them, For eueryche of
them may case him, though perchance they can not forthwith perfitely cure
him.

Consider, that the corruption of mans nature is not so much declared in any
thing, as Counsels against ingratitude.
in Ingratytude, whereby a man is made wars, than divers brute beasts. The
little ante or emote helps up his fellow, whom he sees overthrown with
burdeyn, or by other occasyon. Also when olyphantes do pass over any great
Appianus in uaria hi storia.
water, the greatest and most puissant of them deuyde them selves, and
setting the weakest in the myddell, part go before, tryeng the depnesse and
perylles, part come after, succourynge the weakest or least, with their lunge
noses, when they see them in danger. The same beasts have ben seen not only
bring men out of deserts, which have lost their ways, but also revenge the
dyspleasures done to them, the which gave them meat, as one that slew him,
which had committed aduoutrye with his masters wife. The terrible Lyons and
Panthers, have been scene in their manner, to render thanks to their
benefactors, ye and to object their own bodies and lives for their defence.
The same we may dayely behold in our own dogs.

Than in whom thou fyndest the detestable vice of Ingratytude, reputing him
among the warste sort of creatures, think not that thou haste lost a
friend, but think that thou art^ delivered frome a monster of nature, that
devoured thy love, and that thou art now at lybertye, and haste won
experience to chese the a better. But if this may not suffyse, than Seneca de
benefi. 7.
eftesoones consider, that if thou loke well on thy self, perchance thou
may find the fault whereof thou complain, within thine own bosomme. Call
to thy remembrance, if thou haste always rendered unto every man condygne
thanks or benefytte, of whom thou hast kyndnesse received, or if thou hast
always remembered every one of them, that have done to the any commodity or
pleasure. Thou shalt well perceive, that what thing thou receyuedst in
chyldehode, thou forgattest, or did little esteem, when thou came to
the state of a man, And what thou did remember in youth, in age, thou
dydded little think on: thy nouryces pap, her rockynges, her watchynges,
thou hast not al way remembered, or equally recompensed. Thy scoole masters
study, his labour, his diligence in a like degree, thou haste not requyted.
what greatter friends haste thou had, of whom thou could receive any
greatter benefits, than thy nourysshyng and preserving of thy life, in thy
most feblenesse, or thine erudicion, whereby thy nature was made more
excellent. Remembrynge this leave to be angry or sorrowful, for so common a vice:
yet if it cesse not to grieve the, comferre the ingratitude that doth vere the,
with that ingratitude, which was showed by the Israelytes whom god chase for
his own people, delivered from seruage, showed for them wonders, preserved
them forty years in desert, destroyed for them kings, gave to them the
country, which flowed milk and honey, defended them against all outward
hostylitie, sent unto them such abundance of riches, that silver was in
Hierusalem, as stones in the street, had his tabernacle, and afterward his
most holy temple among them, which he did dayely vysite with his dyuyne
majesty, made their kings to reign gloriousely, and spake with their
prephetes familyarly, and corrected their errors most gentilly: and yet for
all this, they, embracing the paynims ydolatrie, they left so gracious and
loving a lord, and living god, and to his great despite, gave divine
honours, to calves of brass, and other monstruouse images, and at the last
put to most cruel death, the only son of god, that had done so much for
them.

And if we christen men, do loke well on our selves, reuoluynge the
incomparable benefit, which we have received by Christ's passion, and
consider the circumstance of his most excellent patience, and most fervent
love toward us, with our forgetfulness, and they daily breche of our promise,
which we made at our baptysme, conferring our mutual vnkyndnes thereunto,
there shall appear no ingratitude, that shulde offend us. Fynally for a
conclusion, behold well about the, and thou shalt all day find the
chylderne ingrate to their parents, and wives to their husbands. And will
thou look that thy benefyte, or vain expectation, should make the more fre
from ingratitude of thy friend, whom chance hath sent the, than nature may
the parents toward their chyldern, or the conjunction of bodies by lefull
marriage, take vnkyndnesse from the wives toward their husbands. This vice
therefore of Ingratitude, being so common a chance, make no worldly
frendeshyp so precious, that life or helthe therefore shulde be spent or
consumed. I have ben the longer in this place, because I have had in this
grief sufficient experience.

If death of chylderne be cause of thy heuynesse, Death of children.
call to thy remembrance some chyldern (of whom there is no little number)
whose lives either for vncorrigyble vices, or unfortunate chances, have been
more greuouse unto their parents, than the death of thy chylderne ought to
be unto the (...) considering that death is the discharger of all gryefes, and
miseries, and to them that dye well, the first entry into life everlasting.

The loss of goods or authority do green none but fools, which do not
mark diligently, Loss of goods.
that like as neither the one nor the other doth always happen to them that
are worthy, so we have in dayely experience, that they fall frome him
sodeynely, who in increasynge or keeping them seems most busy.

Oftentimes the repulse frome promotion is Lack of promotion.
cause of discomfort, but than consider, wither in the opinion of good men,
thou art deemed worthy to have such advancement, or in thine own expectatio
fantasy. If good men so inge the, thank thou god of that felicity, and laugh
at the blyndnesse of them, that so have refused the. If it proceed of thine
own folly, abhor all arrogance, and enforce thy self to be ad uanced in
men estimation, before thou can find thy self worthy in thy proper
opinion.

All other chances of fortune esteem as no Chances of fortune.
thing, and that lunge before they do happen. The oft recordynge of misery,
prepares the mind to feel less adversity. And the contempt of fortune is
sure quietness and most perfyte felicity.

This now shall suffyse concerning remedies of moral philosophy. Now will
I write somewhat touching the counsel of physyke, as in relieuynge the
body, which either by the said occasyons, or by the humour of melancholy is
brought out of temper.

The first counsel is, that during the time of that passion, eschew to be
angry, studyouse, or solitary, and rejoice the with mei^dye, or else be always
in such company, as best may content the.

Avoid all things that be noyouse in sight, smelling and hearing, and
embrace all thing that is delectable.

Flee darkness, much watch, and busynesse of mind, much companieng with
women, the use of things very hot and dry: often purgations, immoderate
exercise, thyrst, much abstinence, dry wyndes and cold.

Absteyn from daily eating of much old blefe or old mutton, hard chese, hare
flesh, bores flesh, venyson, saltefyshe, coolewortes, beans, and peason, very
course breadde, great fish of the see, as thurlepole, porpyse, and
sturgeon, and other of like natures, wine red and thycke, meates being very
salt or sour, old, burned, or fried, garlyke, onyons, and lekes.

Use meates which are temperately hot, and therewith somewhat moyste, boiled
rather than roasted, light of dygestyon, and ingendryng blood clear and fine.
As milk hot from the vdder, or at the lest new mylked, ruen chese, sweet
almondes, the yelkes of rear eggs, little birds of the bushes, chyckens, and
hens. wine white or clarette, clear and feagraunte. Sweet savours in winter
hot, in summer cold, in the mean time temperate.

Confortatiues of the hart hot.
Bourage the flower or leaf. Buglosse. Baulmynte. Elycampane. Cloves.
Cardamomu^. Rosemary. Lignum aloes. Musk. Ambergryse. Saffron. The bone of the
heart of a red deer. Myntes. The rynde of Citron. Been. Cububes. Basyle.
Cenfortatyues of the heart cold.
Violettes. Perles. Coral. The unicorns horne. Old appulles which be good.
Roses. Saunders. The olyphantes tothe. Water lylies. Coriander prepared.
Comfortatyues temperate.
Jacinet. Sapphire. Emerauldes. Myrabolanes, called kebuly. Buglosse. Gold,
silver.
Of Joy.
I^ or gladness of heart doth prolong the life, it fats the body that is
lean with troubles, bytynge the humours to an equal temperance, and drawing
natural heate outward. But if it be sudden fervent, it oftentimes sleeth,
for as much as it draws to suddenly and excessyuely natural heate outward.
And therefore divers men and women have ben scene to fall in a sound, when they
have sodaynlye beholden the persons, whom they fervently loved. A a woman in
Rome, hearing first, that her son was slain in battle. After when he Ti.
Liuius.
came to her, she saying him alive, imbracynge each other, she dyed in his
arms. This well considered, against such inordinate gladness, the best
prescruatiue is to remember, that the extreme parts of mundayne joy is sorrow
and heuynesse: And that nothing of this world, may so much rejoice us: but
occasyon may cause it to be displeasant unto us.

The dominion of sondry complexions. Cap. 13.
IT seems to me not inconvenient, that I do declare as well the counsayles of
ancient approved authors, as also mine own opinion gathered by diligent
markynge in dayely experience, concerning as well the necessary diet of every
complexion, aege and declinatio of helthe, as also the mean to resyste
discrasies of the body, before syckenesse be therein confirmed, leaving the
resydue unto the substancyall learning and circumspect practyse of good
physicians, which shall the more easily cure their patients, if their
patients do not dysdayne to bear away and follow my counsel. And first it
ought to be considered, that none of the four complexions, have sooly such
dominion in one man or woman's body, that no part of any other complexion is
therewith myxte. For when we call a man sanguine, choleryke, fleumatyke, or
melancholy, we do not mean, that he has blood only without any of the
other humours, or choler without blood, or fleume without blood or
melancholy, or melancholy without blood or coler. And therefore the man,
which is sanguine, the more that he draws into age, whereby natural moisture
decayed, the more is he coleryke, by reason, that heate, surmountynge moisture,
needs must remain heate and drythe. semblably, the colerycke man, the more
that he waxes into age, the more natural heate in him is abated, and drythe
surmountynge natural moisture, he becomes melancolyke: but some sanguine man
has in the proporcion of temperatures, a greatter myxture with choler, than
an other hath. Likewise the cholerycke or fleumatyke man with the humour of
sanguyne or melancholy. And therefore late practysers of physyke are wont to
call men, according to the myxture of their complexions, as sanguyne colerike,
fleumatike sanguine. c. Moreover, beside the naturalle complexions, which man
receives in his generation, the humours, whereof the same complexions do
consyste, being augmeted superfluously in the body or members by any of the
said things called not natural, every of them do semblably augment the
complexion, which is proper unto him, and brings unequal temperature unto
the body. And for these causes, the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman,
feeling and discrasye by choler happened to them by the said things, called not
natural, they shall use the diet described hereafter to him, which is
naturally coleryke. Semblably the coleryke or melancolyke manne or woman,
having any dyscreasye by fleume, to use the diet of him, which is naturally
fleumatyke, always remembrynge, that sanguyne and fleumatyke men have more
respect unto dryth, choleryke and melancalyke unto moisture, and that always as
the accedentall complexion decay eth, to resort by little and little to the
dyete, pertaining to his natural complexion.

The times appropried to every natural humour. Cap. 14.
But first it must be considered, that where the four humours, be always in
man, and in some man commonly one humour is more abundant than an other
naturally, that is to say, from his generation. The said humours have also
peculyar times assigned to every one of them, wherein each of them is in his
most power and force, as after ensues, after the description of Soranus.
Soranus Ephesius


Fleume hath most puissance in winter, from the.viii. Idus of November, unto
the.viii. Jdus of February, whereby are engendered Catarres or reumes, the
vuula, the cough, and the stytche. This humour is part in the heed, part in
the stomach. It has dominion frome the third hour of night vutyll the
nyneth hour of the same night.

Blood increases in spring time from the viii. Idus of Februarye, unto
the.viii. Idus of May, whereof are engendered fevers, and sweet humours,
which do shortly putrifye, the power of this humour is about the heart, and
hath dominion from the.ix. hour of night until the.iii. hour of the
morning.

Red choler has power in summer frome the.viii. Idus of May, until
the.viii. Idus of Auguste / whereby are engendered hot and sharpe fevers / this
humour is specially in the liver / and hath dominion from the third hour of
day until the.ix. hour of the same day.

Yelow choler, whereof is engenders the fleume of the stomach / is nourished in
Autumn, which begins the.viii. Idus of Auguste / and dureth unto the.viii.
Idus of November / and makes shaking fevers and sharpe, the black choler than
increases / and than follows thycknes of the blode in the veins. Black
choler or melancholy most raynes in the spleen / and it raynes from the.ix.
hour of day until the third hour of night.

Peculyar remedies against the distem perance of every humour.
IF the disteperance be of blood / help it with Soranus ^arte medendi.
things cold, sharpe, and dry: for blood is moyste, hot sweet. If it be of
red choler give things cold / moyste / and sweet / for red coler is bitter
and fyry. If it be of black coler / give things hot moist sweet / for black
coler is sharpe cold. If the disease be of salt fleume give things sweet hot
and dry, thus saith Soranus. Notwithstanding where there is abundance of cold
fleume not myxt with coler / there things very sharpe and hot be most
convenient / as tart vyneger with hot rotes and sedes or wynes strong and
rough / honey being sodden in the one and the other / or where choler is myxt
with fleume / syrope acetouse made with vinegar and sugar boiled / sometime with
herbs / roots or sedes / which may dissoule fleume digest it.

Diet of them, which are of sanguine complexion. Cap. 15.
FOr asmoche as in sanguine men blood most raygneth / which is soon
corrupted, it shall be necessary for them which are of that complexion / to be
circumspect in eating meat / that shortly will receive putrefaction / as
the more part of fruits / specyally not being perfitely ripe. also meates
that be of i'll juice / as flesh of beasts to old / or to yonge / vdders of
beasts / brains except of capons and chykens marowe of the backebone / much
use of onyons lekes / garlyke / much use of old figs / much use of raw
herbs / and all thing wherein is excess of hete / cold / or moisture / meates
that be stale / fyshes of the fens or muddy waters / and to much sleep / as
experience shows.

Dyete of choleryke persons. Ca. 16.
TO them which be choleric / being in these naturalle temperature / and
having not from their youth used the contrary / gross meates moderately taken
/ be more convenient / than the meates that be fine, and better shall they
dygeste a piece of good beef / than a chyckens leg. Choler of his property
rather burning than well dygestynge meates of light substance / not
withstanding some gentylmen which be nycely brought up in their infancy / may
not so well sustain that diet as poor men being the more part used to gross
meates. wherefore their diet must be in a temperance / as yonge beef / old
veale / mutton / and venyson powdered, yonge geese, and such like, coseruyng
their complexion with meates like there unto in quality and degree, according
to the counsel of Hipocrates. And as he perceives choler to abound, so to
interlace meates, which be cold in a moderate quantity, and to allay their
wine more or lass with water, eschewynge hot spices, hot wynes, and
excessyue labour, whereby the body may be much chaufed. Also he may eat
oftener in the day, than any other: foresene, that there be such distance
between his meals as the meat before eaten be fully dygested, which in some
person is more, in some lass, according to the heate and strength of his
stomach, notynge always, that the colerike person digests more meat than
his appetite desires, the melancolyke person desires by false appetite more
than his stomach may dygeste. And to a choleric person, it is right
dangerous, to use lunge abstynence: for choler, finding nothing in the
stomach to concocte, it fares than, as where a little potage or milk,
being in a vessel over a great fire, it is burned to the vesselle, and
unsavoury fumes and vapours do issue out thereof. Likewise in a choleric
stomach, by abstinence, these inconveniences do happen, humours adust,
consumynge of natural moisture, fumosities and stynkynge vapours, ascendynge
up to the heed, whereof is engendered, duskynge of the eyes, heed aches, hot and
thynne reumes, after every little surfeit, and many other inconveniences.
wherefore beside the opinion of best learned men, mine own peynefull
experience, also moves me, to exhort them, which be of this complexion, to
eschew much abstinece. And although they be studyous, and use little
exercise, yet in the morning to eat somewhat in little quantity, and not to
study immediately, but first to sit a while, and after to stand or walk
softly, which vsynge these two years, I and also other, that have lunge
known me, have perceived in my body a great alteration, that is to say, frome
ylle astate to better. Always remember, that if any other humour do aboude in
the choleryke person, as fleume, or melancholy, than until that humour be
expelled, the diet must be correctiue of that humour, and therefore more hot
and fine, than the natural dyete before rehearsed: but yet there would be always
respect had to the natural complexion, some time suffering the person to
eat or drink that, which nature workynge, he fervently desires.

Diet of fleumatike persons Capitulo. 17.
IT is to be remembered, that pure fleume is properly cold and moyste, and
lacks taste. Salt fleume is myxt with choler, and therefore hath not in him
so much cold nor humidity, as pure fleume hath: and therefore it requires a
temperance in things hot dry, whereby fleume is digested or expulsed To
fleumatike persons all meates are noyfull, which are very cold, vyscous or
slymy, fat or soon putrified, eating much and often, specially meates
ingendrynge fleume, which be remembered in the table precedynge. All things be
ggod, which are hot and dry, also meates and drinks which be sour: onyons
also, and garlyke, moderately used, be very commendable, in pure fleme not
myxte with choler, much using of salt, specially dried. Pepper gross beaten,
and eaten with meat, ought to be with all fleumatycke persons familyar, also
gynger is right convenient, but not to be so frequently used as pepper, for as
much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it passes through the
body, heatyng and comfortynge the stomach, not entering into the veins, or
anoyeng the liver, which virtue is not in gynger. Gynger condite, the which
we do call grene gynger, specyallye candid with sugar, if it may be gotten, and
also Mirabolanes, called kebuli condyte in India, be most excellent remedies
against fleume, also the herbs which are remembered before in the table of
digestyues of fleume, and the roots of persely, fenel, yreos, Elycampane, and
carettes be very commendable. Exercise twyse in a day, the stomach being
almost empty, so that sweat begin to appear, is very expedient, clensynge of
the body from all fylthynes, with rubbing and wypynge, oftentimes with
washing, specyally the heed and partis there about moderate sweating in hot
bathes or stufes be to this complexion necessary specially when they have
eaten and drunken excessyuely. The heed and fete to be kept frome cold and to
dwell high and far from mores and marshes, is a rule right necessary, also
to abstain from eating herbs and roots not boiled, and generally from all
meates, which will not be easily dygested.

The dyuysion of melancholy, and the diet of persons melancolyke. Cap. 18.
Melancholy is of two sorts, the one is called natural, which is only cold
and dry, the other is called adust or bourned. Natural melancholy is (as Galene
saith) the residence or dregs of the blood: therefore is colder and thicker
than the blood. Melancholy aduste is in four kinds, either it is of natural
melancholy aduste, or of the more pure part of the blood aduste, or of choler
aduste, or of salt fleume aduste. But of all other that melancholy is warst,
which is engendered of choler: fynally all aduste melancholy annoys the wit
and iugement of man. for when that humour is hette, it makes men mad, and
when it is extinct, it makes men fools, forgetfulle, and dull. The natural
melancholy kept in his Ex Marcilio ficino, de uita sana.
temperance, profyteth much to true iugemente of the wit, but yet if it be
to thycke, it darkens the spirits, makes one timorous, and the wit dull.
If it be myxte with fleume, it mortifies the blood with to much cold,
wherefore it may not be so little, that the blood and spirits in their
feruentnesse, but as it were vnbrydelyd, whereof do happen vnstablenesse of
wit and slipper remembrance: nor yet so much, that by the weight thereof
(for it is heavy, approchynge nygh to the earth) that we seem to be always in
sleep, and need a spur to prycke us forward. Wherefore it is right
expedient, to keep that humour as thynne as nature will suffer it, and not to
have to much of it.

But now to the diet perteynynge to them, whom this humour annoys. The
knowledge that melancholy reygneth, is oftentimes heuynesse of mind, or fear
without cause, slepinesse in the members, many cramps without replecyon or
emptynesse, sudden fury, sudden incontynencye of the tongue, much
solycytude of light things, with palynesse of the visage, and fearful
dreams of terryble visyons, dreaming of darkness, deep pyttes, or death of
friends or acquaintance, of all thing that is black. The meates convenient
are they, which be temperatly in heate, but specially they that be moist meates
soon dygested, and they rather boiled than roasted, temperately myxte with
spices, milk hot from the vdder, or late mylked, is very convenient for that
complexion, sweet almondes blaunched, and almond milk, the yelkes of rear
eggs, and fynallye all things, which engender pure blood, and all that is
written in the chapyter of age. All these be ill for them, wine thycke or
troublous, specyally red wine, meates harde, dry, very salt, or sour, bourned
meat, fried meat, much beef, hares flesh, beans, roket, colewortes,
mustard, radyshe, garlyke, except there be much wind in the body, for than is
it very wholesome, onyons leekes, fynally all things which heats to much,
keleth to much, or dries to much, also wrath, fear, compassion, sorrow,
much study or care, much ydelnesse or rest: all thing that is grievous to
see, to smelle or to hear, but most specyally darkness. Moreover much
dryenge of the body, either with lunge watch, or with much care and tossynge
of the mind, or with much lecherye, or much eating and drinking of things
that be hot and dry, or immoderate euacation, labour, abstinence, thyrst,
going in the air vntemperately hot, cold or dry, all these things do annoy
them that be grieved with any melancholy. It is to be dylygentely considered,
that where melancholy happens of choler adduste, there meates which be hot
in warkyng, wold be wisely tempered, and drinking of hot wynes would be
eschewed: semblable cautel wold be in savours. Not withstanding moderate use
of small wynes, clear and well verdured, is herein very commendable, the humour
thereby being clarifyed, and the spyrytes cleansed, but the abuse or excess
thereof doth as much damage. Also it is right expedyente, to put into wine
or ale, a gad of silver or gold, glowing hot out of the fire, to tempre
hot meates with roses, vyolettes, saunders, rose water, bourage, buglosse,
balm called in latyne Melyssa, or the water of all three drunken with good
wine, white or clarette, or made in a Julep with sugar, is wonderful wholesome,
chewing of lykoryse, or raysons of coraunce is right expedyent, but most of
all other things, mirth, good compauye, gladness, moderate exercise, with
moderate feeding. And thus I leave to speak of dyetes, aptely belonging to
the four complexions.

Galene and all other, do agree in this case, Pepper bruised and eaten with
meat, is very expedient: And where there is much wind in the stomach, than to
eat all times of the day of the medicine made of the three kinds of pepper,
time, anyse sede, and honey clarified, which is called Diatrion piperion, or
that which is called Diaspolitico, or Diapiganon, which is made Galen. de
^enda sa. ^b. 5.
of cumyne stieped one day and a night, or longer in tart vyneger, and after
fried or laid on a bournyng hot stone, and made in powlder. Also pepper and
few dried somewhat, and made into powder, all in equal porcyons, and myxte
with claryfied honey. Galene adds thereto salt peter, called in latin Nitrum.
The confection made with the juice of quynces, and is called Diacyconiten, is
very excellent. but it is to be diligently noted, that where crudytie is in a
choleryke person, there wold the said medicynes be temperatly used, and the
said Diacytonite, to have little or no spices in it. And for my part, being
the space of four years continually in this crudytie, I never found any
thing to be compared to fine R^ubarbe, chewed with raysons of corens, which I
toke by the cousayle of the worshipful well learned physitio, master doctor
Augustyne, who in his manners declarethe the auneyent gentylnesse of his blode:
which medicine I do not leave to use daily fasting, when I feel such crudytie
to begin. Also syrope acetose, that is to say, sugar sodden in pure vyneger,
and little water, vntyl it be thycke as a syrope, is sometime convenient, and
that as well to choleryke persons, as unto fleumatyke, and if fleume be
abundant, than with roots seeds of fenell and persely sodden with it. Also in
that case Oxymel, that is to say, honey water sodden together, with the said
rotes and sedes, and a quantity of vyneger put thereto in the boiling is very
commendable: if the patient be very costyue, than the medicine of Galene,
called Hierapicra, from half an ounce to an ounce, taken in water of honey or
ale, or taken in pylles the weight of a groat and a half, or two grotes, if
the stuff be good, will pourge the body suffycyently, without making the body
weaker. Also that medicine by clensyng the stomach body, delyuereth a man and
woman, from many peryllous sycknesses. If the humours in the stomach be not
putryfyed, but that it is grieved with abundance of salt fleume, I have found
that milk new mylked, wherein is put a quantity of good honey or sugar, and
three leaves of good spear myntes, and a little boiled, so being drunk warm
fasting, the quantity of a pynte, and resting on it, without eating or
drinking any other thing the space of three hours after, have abundantly
pourged and comforted the stomach: but where there is no fleume but only choler,
it is not so wholesome, but rather hurts, making fumosyties in the heed,
whereof comes heed ache.

Of lassitude. Cap. 2.
LAssitude is a disposition toward sycknes, wherein a man feleth a soorenesse, a
swellynge, or an inflammation. Soreness happens of humours sharpe and gnawyng,
as after great exercise and labours which lassitude happens to them, whose
bodies are fulle of ylle juice, excrementes. Also after cruditie in them which
are not exercised, or do abide lunge in the A^
heate of the son. It may also be in the body, wherein is good wyce, if he be
fatigate with immoderate exercise. In them, which do feel this lassitude, the
skyn appears thycke and rough, there is felt a grief sometime in the skyn
only, ^.
^tyme also in the flesh, as it were of a soore. The cure thereof, is by much
and pleasant rubbing, with sweet oils, which have not the virtue to
restrain or close, and that with many hands, and afterward to exercise
moderately, and to be banned in water sweet and temperate in heate. also tha
must be given meates of good juice, potage but seld, wine is not to be
forbodden: for unto wine, vneth any thing may be compared, that so ^ell
dygesteth crude humours: It also provokes sweat urine, and makes one to
sleep sundly. But if this lassitude do abide the night and day following, or
waxes more more, than if the pacyent be of good strength and yonge, and hath
abundauce of blood, let him be let blood, or provoke the hemoroides or
piles to blede, if they do appear. But if it proceed of the malice of any
humour, without abundance of blood, than resort to purgations apt for the
humour that grieves. The tokens whereof, shall appear as well by the colour of
the skyn and diet precedyng, as by urine, ordure, sweat, thyrste, and
appetite, as it is rehearsed before in the complexions. If the ill blood be
little in quantity, and the crude humours abundant, than shall he not be
let blood, nor vehemently pourged, neither, shall exercise or move himself
nor be banned, for all exercise carries humours throughout all the body,
stops the powers. Wherefore these manner of persons should be kept in rest,
and such meates drynkes and medicyns should be given to them, which should
attenuate or dissolve the grossenes of the humours, without notable heate, as
oximell, barley water, and mulse, if the pacyent abhor not honey. And for as,
much as in the said persons, commonly there is abundance of wind about their
stomachs, therefore pepper specially lunge pepper or white is very convenient to
be used, and the medicine before written, called Diaspoliticum, when the
humours are dissolved, than it is good to drink white wine, or small clarette
wine moderately.

Lassitude extensiue. Ca. 3.
VVan one thinks, that he doth feel a swelling or bollynge of the body,
where in dede there doth not appear in sight or touching any swellynge, that
is called Lassitude extensiue, if it happens without exercise or vehement
moving. This doth happen of excessive multitude of humours, which do extend the
muscules or fyllettes. In this no soreness is felt but only an heuynes with
extension or thrusting out of the body. And because that there is abundance of
blood in the body, best remedy is to be letten blood about the elbow or
ankle, after to be pourged, than to use soft frycasyes with oils before
rehearsed, afterward much rest and temperate bathes, and meates lacking
sharpness, and being abstersyue.

Lassytude with the feelynge of infamation. Cap. 4.
IF without any mouynge, the muscles and flesh rise up in the body, as it
swelled with great pains excedynge heate, than soon after follows most hotest
fevers, except it be prevented by lettynge of blood, and that in abundance, and
almost to sownynge, but it were Actius.
more sure to be let blood twyse in one day, the first time without sownynge,
at the next time sownynge is not to be feared. If the grefe be in t^ neck or
heed, the blood must be let of the bayne called Cephalea, or the shoulder
vain. If it be in the bulk or uppermost part of the body than must the vain
be cut, which is called Basilica, or the innermost vain. If all the body be
grieved tha cut the veyn, which is named Mediana, or the myddel veyn. If a fever
remain after blood letting, than order him, with the dicte of them that have
fevers, which ye shall find written hereafter. If no fever remain, than use
moderate fricasies, and little eating, and that of meates having good juice,
increasynge by little and little to the natural diet.

Dyete of them that are ready to fall into syckenesse. Cap. 5.
Now return eftesones to speak of diet, it is to be remembered, that they,
which are ready to fall into diseases, they are prepared thereunto, either by
replecyon of superfluous humours, or else by eruditie or malice of humours,
which are in them. As touching the first, the general dyete must be such, as
thereby the humours may be attenuate, and by convenient euacuatio, brought to a
moderate quantity. As for the second must be corrected with meates and
drynkes of contrary qualities, having always respect to the age of the person,
time of the year, place of habitation, and most specially the universal
complexion, for choler offending in an old man, in winter time, in a cold
country, or the person being of his natural complexion fleumatike or
melancholy, would not be so habundantly expulsed or subdued, as if it be in one
yonge and lusty, in the hot summer, in the coutrais, where the son fervently
burns or the person of his proper nature is very coleryke. And in like wise
contrary. wherefore every man, knowing his own natural complexion, with the
quality of the humour that offends, let him make temperance his chief coke,
and remembrynge that which I have before declared, ordeyne to him self such
diet, as may reform the offence with none or little annoyance, to his
universal complexion. And if he can so do, he shall happily escape, not only
divers syckenesses but also the most pernicious danger, proceeding of corrupted
drowges or spices, whereof some covetous poticaries do make medicines, maugre
the heeds of good and well learned physicyons.

Syckenes most commune to particular times of the year and ages. Ca. 6.
ALthough I do not intede to write of the cure of egritudes or syckenesses
confirmed, as well because it moughte be reputed in me a great presumption, as
also forasmoche as it were very peryllous to dinulgate that noble science, to
comune people, not learned in liberal sciences and philosophie, which be
required to be suffyciently in a physician. And more over, many books of
Hipocrates and Galene ought to be radde, before that one do take upon him the
general cure of men's bodies: yet not withstanding, I trust I may without any
note of arrogance write, what diseases do most commonly happen in sondry times
of the year ages of men and women, with some signifycations, whereby the
discrasie or distemperature of the body is perceived, to the intent that the
physician being far of, may be truly informed / considering that vrines
far carried, do often deceive them / and like wise lack of the syghte of the
pacyent / and inquisition of things which do precede or follow the syckenesse.
And with this I trust none honest and charytable physician will be offended /
but rather give to me thanks for my diligence / in the aduaunrynge of their
estimation, which by lack of perfect instruction hath ben appayred.

Syckenesses of spring time.
Diseases procedynge of melancholy / as madness / falling syckenesse /
bleedynges / auynses / poses / hoorsenesse / coughs / lepries / scabs / ache
in the joints.

Syckenesses of summer.
Many of the said diseases / also fevers concynuall / hot fevers / fevers
tertiane / quartaynes / vomits / flyres / watryng of eyes / peynes of the
ears / blysters and soores of the mouth / and sweattynges.

Syckenesses of Autumn.
Divers of summer syckenesses / also oppilations of the spleen / dropsies /
consumptios / stragulyons / costyuenesse / ache in the huckle boones /
shortness of wind / frettynge of the bowels / falling syckenesse / and
melancholy dyseases.

Syckenesse of winter.
Stitches and griefs in the sides / inflamatio of the lunges / reumes /
coughs / pains in the bresle / sides / and loins / heed ache / palseyes.

Sycknesses happening to chyldern.
When they be new borne / there do happen to them soores of the mouth called
Aphte / vomitynge / coughs / watching / fearfulness / inflammations of the
nauyll / moystures of the ears.

Wwhan they breed teeth / ytchynge of the gummes / fevers / cramps / and
laskes.

When they ware elder / than be they grieved with kernelles / oppennesse of the
mold of the heed / shortness of wind / the stone of the bladder / wourmes
of the bealy / wartes / swellynges under the chynne / and in Englande commonly
purpyls / measels / and small pockes.

Syckenesse happening to yonge men from.xiiii. years of age.
Fevers cotydiane / tereyane / quarteyne / hot fevers / spyttynge or
vomitynge of blood / pleuresies / diseases of the sides / inflammation of the
lunges / lethargies / fransye / hot syckenesses / cholerik passios /
costiuenes or vehement laskes.

Syckenesse of age.
Difficulty of breathe / reumes with coughs / strangulyon / and dyfficultie
in pyssynge / ache in the joints, diseases of the raynes, ^wymmynges in the
heed, palseyes, ytchynge of all the body, lack of sleep, moisture in the eyes
and ears dullness of sight, hardness of hearing, tisiknesse or shortness of
breath.

Although many of the said syckenesses do happen in every time and age, yet
because they be most frequent in the said times and ages, I have written them,
to the intent, that in the ages and times most inclined unto them, such
things mought be than eschewed, which are apt to ingendre the said
diseases.

The general sygnifications and tokens of syckenes. Cap. 7.
IF the body be hotter, colder, moyster, drier, leaner, fuller, the colour
more pale, or swarte, the eyes more holowe, than is accustomed to be it
sygnifieth that the body is disposed to syknes, or already sick.

The brain sick. Rauynge. Forgetfulness. Fantasy. Humours coming from the
roufe of the mouth, the eyes, the nose, or the ears. Watch. Sleep.

The heart sick. Difficulty of breathe. Trembling of the heart. Beatynge of
the pulse. Fevers. Cold. Diutrsite of colours. Grief about the heart.

The liver sick. Lack or abudauce of humours. The form of the body alteted.
Paleness. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrementes accustomed. Peyne in
the place of the liver. Swellynge. Difficulty of breath.

The stomach sick. Concoction, slow or quycke. Appetite of moyste or dry,
dull or quycke. Separatio of excremetes moist or harde with their colours.
Yexynge. Belkynge. Vometynge with peyne and difficulty of brethe. Vryne much
or little with the colour and substance to red or to pale, to thick or to
thynne

The breast. Difficulty of breathe. Cowgh. Spyttynge. Peyne in the breast.

This have I written, not to give iudgemen^ thereby, but only for the pacyent
to have in a redynesse, to the intent, that what so ever he feleth or
perceives in every of the said things thereof to instruct his physician,
whereunto he may adapt his counsel and remedies.

Of vrynes. Cap. viii.
FOrasmoch as now a days the most commune judgment in syckenesse is by
vrines, which being far carried or much meued, or standing lunge after that
it is made, the form thereof is so altered, that the phisytion shall not
perfytely perceive the natural colour, nor contents, although it be never so
well chaufed at the fire, as Actuarius and other great learned men do affirm.
I will therefore somewhat speak of vrines, not so much as a physician knows,
but as much as is necessarieto every man for to perceive the place and cause
of his grief, whereby he may the better instruct the Physician.

First in urine, four things are to be considered, that is to say, the
substance, the colour, the regions or parts of the urine, and the contents or
things therein contained.

Also forasmoch as in the body of man be four qualities, heate, cold,
moisture, and dryth, two of them heat and cold, are causes of the colour, dryth
and moisture are causes of the substance.

Moreover in vryne, being in a vessel apt there unto be scene, are three regios.
The lowest region in the bottom of the vrynall, containing the space of two
fyngers or little more. The myddel region, from whens the lowest ended unto the
cerkele. The highest region is the cerkle.

The hyghnesse of the colour sygnifyeth heate, the place, black, or grene,
sygnifyeth could.

Also the grossenes or thyckenesse of the vryne sygnifieth moisture, the
clerenes or thynnes, sygnifieth drithe.

The colours of vrynes.
Colour of bright goulde. Colour of gylte.
Perfyte dygestyon.
Red as a red apple or cheri. Base red, like to bole ar^enake, or saffron dry
Red glowynge like fire.
Excess of digestion.
Colour of a beasts liver. Colour of dark red wine. Grene like to colewortes.

Adustion of humours.
Leaddy colour. Black as ink. Black as horne.
Feblenes or mortifycation of nature, except it be in purging of melancholy.
White clear as water. Gray as a horne. White as why. Colour of a camels
hear.
Lack of dygestyon.
Pale like to broth of flesh sodden. The beginnynge of digestyon.
Citrine Colour or yelowe. Subcitrine or paler.
The myddell of dygestyon.
White and thin betokens melancholy to have domynyon. White and thycke,
sygnifieth fleume. Red and thycke betokens sangnuine. Red and thin
betokenethe choler to have the souerayntie.
The substance of the urine. Cap. ix.
AT the first pissyng, all vrines well nigh do appear thyn, as lunge as they
abide warm, for natural heate, during the time that it prevails, suffers
not that the lycour, which is the substance of the urine, to con^le or be
thycke for any occasion: but after that heate is gone, some vrines shortly,
some a lodger time after, wax thyck, like wise sometime, some a^pissed thicker,
after wax clear, some remain stylle as they were made, some be meetly thycke,
as they were troubled, some very thick gross. Thoi that wax clear, soon do
gather that, which is thick into the bottom of the vrinal, some remain
troubled, the grossenes not withstanding gathered in the bottom. Seblably the
diversity of thyn or subtle vrines, must be perceived, that is to say, that
some are very subtle, as water, some lass subtle, some in a mean between
thycke and thynne.

Of things contained in the urine, some do discende down to the bottom, be
called in a greek word Hypostasis, in english some call it the groudes,
some the resydece, which if it be white, light, risynge up fro the bottom of
the urinal, like a pear, it signifies health, if it be of any other figure or
colour, it betokens some a noyance. If like things be scene in the myddell of
the vrynall, they be called sublations, if they approach unto the highest
region of the urine, they be named clouds, in latin Nebule. The groudes or
resideces not perfect, some is like lit ^e^le red vetches, is called in latin
Orobea, some is like to bran of wheat gronde, severed from the meal, and is
called branny residece, in latin Furfurea, some be like unto plates, having
breadth and length without thycknes, may be named platy residece, in latin
Laminea, some is like to meal, wheat, or barley, and may be named mealy
residence, in latin Sunilacea.

There is also seen in the urine like to white hears, some lengar, some
shorter, sotune like to rags somewhat red, there is also scene in the up
permoste part of the urine, sometime a some or froth sometime belles or bobles.
sometime there swymmeth in the urine a thing like a copwebbe otherwhile there is
about the cerkle, as it were the retyng of clothe, sotyme there is in the urine
like motes of the son, sotyme like the matter of a sore, otherwhyle like the
sede of a man also grauelle or sand. And in these things may be divers
colours, some white, some red, some between both, some yelow, some gray, and
some black. All this must be diligently marked, and thereof separatly to
advertise the Phisitio, unto whom I refer the judgment of the syckenes, for
the cause before rehearsed, and for as much as the judgment of them is very
subtle.

Seblably of ordure, wither it be very thyn or very thick: what other matter
yssueth out with it, what colour it is of the savour very great, little or
none, if it were easily expulsed, or peynefully, how oft or how seldom.
Moreover of sweat, what colour it is of, of what savour if in tasting it be
salt, sour, bitter, or unsavoury.

Also the vomit, if it be of one colour or many, if it do smell horrybly, of
what humour it had most habundaunce, if it were fasting, or after meals, if
it were peynefull or easy.

Likewise spettil, whether it be thick or thin or mixed with blood or matter
corrupt, accordingly of the humour issuinge out at the nose, if that be blood,
than wither it be red, watery or black.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, to aduertyse the Physician of the diet used
by the patient, as well before the syckenesse, as in the time of the sychenesse,
his age, the strength of his body, his exercise, and place, where he lengest
abode in his youth, whether it were hye or lowe, watery or dry, hot or cold.

This I trust shall be sufficient, to instruct a physician, he that desires to
know more particularly hereof, let him rede the books of Hypocrates, Galene,
Cornelyus Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and divers other late wrytters, for this
little treatise may not receive it.

The preceptis of the ancient physician Dyocles unto king Antigonus. Cap. 10.
We will now divide the body of man into four parts, the heed, boulke,
called in latin thorax, which conteyneth the breast, the sides, the stomach, and
entrails. The belly, called in latin venture, conteyneth the panche the bowels.
Also the bladder, called in latin vesica, in the which name is also contained
the cundites, by the which vryne passes. When any disease approaches to the
heed, these tokens do commonly precede, swymmyng in the hced, heed ache,
heuines of the brows, sounding in the ears, pryckynges in the temple, the
eyes in the morning do water, or wax dymme, the smelling is dull, the
gummes do smelle. When thou felest such tokens forthwith pourge the heed with
somwath, not with vehement medecines, but taking I soap or Organum, the
croppes of them boyle with white or claret wine half a pynte, therewith
gargarise your mouth fasting, until the fleume be purged out of your heed,
this is the easyest medicine in discrasies of the heed. It is also very wholesome
to gargaryse the mouth and breast with honey water, whereinto mustard is put
mingled, but first the heed must be rubbed with a warm clothe, that the fleum
may easily come out of the heed. And if these tokens be neglected, these manner
of syckenesses do follow soon after, blared eyes, and humour lettinge the
sight, cleftes in the ears, swell lynges in the neck full of matter, called
the kings evil, corruption of the brain, poses, or reumes, heuynesse of the
heed, and tooth ache.

When the boulke is like to suffer any sickness it is perceived by these tokens,
all the body is in a sweatte, the bulk most specially, the tongue wa xeth
thick, the spettyll is either salt or bitter, or cholerycke, the sides and
shoulders do ache without any occasyon, the patient gapes often, also there
doth happen much waking, suffocations or lack of breath, thirst after sleep,
the mind is vexed with heuinesse, also the breast and arms are very could,
and the hands do trembele.

Against these thyges this remedy may be provided. After a moderate soupper,
assay to vomit without any medicine, vomyte is also profytable, which meat
doth follow: He that in such wise will vomit, let him eat hastyly small
radysshe roots, townkersis, rokat, synuy, or purslane, and drink after it a
great quantity of warm water, and provoke him sesfe to vomyte. He that
sets little by the said tokes, let him fear these sycknesses following,
the pleuresie, the syckenes of the lunges, melancholy or madness, sharpe fevers,
the fransye, the letargie, inflammation with yexinge.

If any syckenesse be toward the bealy, they may be espied by these tokens,
the bealye is first wrapped together, and in it self is troubled, all meates
and drinks do seem bitter in taste, he feleth heuynesse in his knees, a
styffenes in his loins, a weariness in all his body without any occasio, a
slepynesse in his legs, with a little fever, when thou feleste these tokens,
mollyfie the bealy, not with medicine, but with good order of diet, for it is
best and most sure, to use those things, whereof lightly may ensue none
annoyace, in the number of them are betes boiled in water of honey garlic
sodden, malowes, sorel, mercury, and all things condite in honey. Al these do
erpel the ordure of the belly: but if any of the said signs doth more and more
increase, the lyquour, wherein the sede of Carthamus, callid also Cnicus, is
boiled, is a plesat and sure medicine, small colewortes boiled in a good
quatitie of water, the liquor thereof in measure* ii pintes, saving the third
part of a pint, with hon^ and salt being drunken, shall profit much. Cicer,
and the pulse called in la^o ernum, in english I suppose chittes* in water
drunk fasting, hath the same essect. To them, which set little by the said
tokens, these diseases do sodely happen, Flux of the bealy, bluddy flux,
slyppernes of the bowels, peynes in the guts, ach in huckle bones the fever
terciane, the gowte, the apoplexy or palsy in the lymmes, hemoroides, aching
of joints.

When the bladder is toward any sickness, it is perceived by these tokes,
fullness felt after little meat, brekyng wind downward and upward, paleness
of colour in al the body, heavy or troublous sleapes, the urine pale, and
passing forth peynefully, swellynges about the coddes privy members. When these
tokens appear, tha is it expedient to hauy remedy of odoriferous things,
which do expel urine, which shall be done without any peril with the rotes
of fenell and persely stieped one or two days in good white wine and to drink
thereof fastinge every morning three ounces and two drames, with the water of
wild carettes, or clycampane, which of these is next at hand, every of the
have like effect. Also water, wherein the peasyn called in latyne Ciceres, are
stieped, being drunk with wine, is like comodiouse: he that neglects the
said tokes, let him loke for these syckenesses fo lowynge, the dropsy, the
greatness of the spleen, grief in the liver, the stone, ache of the back, or
peynes in the raynes, the difficulty of urine, fulness of the belly. In al these
things that we have spoke of, we shall give to child^e most easy medi cines, to
me those, which be stroger in working.

This diet of Diocles, althought at this time it seems not most pleasant,
nor according to the practise now used, yet being tempered with that, which I
have before remembered, some thing may be found in it, which being
experienced, may be as commodious for the health of mans body, as that diet,
which is more curious or pleasant.

Of them in woes stomachs meat is corrupted. Cap. 11.
THey in whom customably meat is corrupted, let them before that they eat any
meat assay to vomit, drinking sweet wine, abstain from meat, that engender
botches inflammations, fumous ructuations or vapours, and take such as noryshe
good juice, chose them out, which do molyfy the belly, at sondry times take
them. It is also good to take temperatly that which lowseth the belly, as the
medicine called picra, and to absteyne from such things, whereby ill iuyre is
gathered, do engender syckenesses, harde to be cured or never, as goutes,
boneache, peynes of the raynes c.

Of the virtue of meates. Cap. 12.
HE that is studious about the conservation of health, he needs to know the
virtue ribasius ^ medici ^ fimp. 1.
of meates. The meat which hath virtue to extenuate, or make humours subtylle,
it opens the poores, and brings forth that which is fast in the flesh,
it makes that which is clammye, subtylle, doth extenuate, or relent that
which is fat, it brings forth that which abides long in the bealy, but
that which is eaten, is a superfluity watery coleryke, and at length makes
melancolike blood. Wherefore much using of them is prohibited, specially to
them, that are colerike, only serves for them that are replete with fleume,
crude or vndigested humours, clammi or fat. The diet of fattinge things,
doth nourish abundantly, so that the stomach liver do digest well: meat of
good juice, makes good blood, but yet it stops the liver spleen. These do
they, which make fat humours only, as the poulse callid Lenticula, they that
are slimy like malowes, some do make fat humours, be also slimy, as fishes with
hard shells. Finally the diet, which doth extenuate make lean, is more sure
for keeping of health, than that, which fats much. Norishing meates wold be
therefore moderateli used, when a ma perceives him self to have need thereof, it
may be most sureli used of them that be exercised temporately, can sleep when
they lust. They that can not sleep by reason of exercise, let them eschew
fattinge meates, let none ydelle person attempt to use them. In the
preservation of health, sluggardy is the greatest mischief. Like as the
temperate moving is good, so is the meat which between thycke thynne, is to
man health most convenient, which engenders blood, according to the
competent costitution of mans body, therefore is it to be chifly used. Meat of
ill juice is always noiful, wherefore it ought to be eschewed. Likewise the
variety of meates is to be observed diligently, for it is a great thing to
couple well together things of contrary virtues. for if they be not well
digested, that which is received, may bring displeasure.

A diet preservative in the time of pestilenee. Capitulo. xiii.
THe bodies most apt to be infected, are specially sanguine, next colerike
than fleumatike last melancolyke, for in them the humour being cold and dry.
is most unapt to receive putrefaction, having also strayte passages, by the
which venom must pass. The lar^inus cinus.
diet convenient for that time is to abstein from meres inflaming and opening
the pores also fro the heat of the soon, from to much heate of fire, or
garmenus, from very hot herbs, and much use of tart things, except onions
and cikory, or radish with vinegar for they do resist against venom, from
wine very furnish, exercise incontinent after meals, fro swetting, from all
thing is that will cause oppilations and putrefaction, fro things hot and
moist, where moisture hath the dominion in degree, specially being not
sufficiently boiled: also from milk, except it be in a little quatite, and
that with a little sugar. Frutis and herbs cold and dry, and there with sour or
somewhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eat figs, grapes, or sweet
cherries, eat after them of an orange with salt. If ye eat things cold and
moist, as cucubers, melones, fyshe soft and fresh, or damsyns, eat by and by
after some fenell, and orange with salt, drinking therwyth a draught of good
wine. Beware of musherons, much purslane, gourdis, and all other things, which
will soon putrefy: not wythstandynge, I will not forbid eating of lettyse,
with a few myntes, or myxt with cynamom. All things sour are commended, as well
in diet coseruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or heals, except where
there is straytnesse of the breast, or weakness of the stomach, than ought
they to be tem, bred with sugar salt, almond milk, cynamom, pepper, fenell,
saffron, eggs / and some thing that is fat or vnctuous. Capers are good to
be used with vinegar. Chese very fat and salt / is not commended / no more is
colewortes / or any kind of pulse / except chittes: great peason / rapes /
nor spynache is good. Also there be forboden rokat and mustard / much wine and
eggs / except they be eaten with sorrel sauce / vyneger / or juice of
orenges: persely and also parsnepes be good. new wynes be noyfull / let the
meat be somewhat more than drink. but yet susteyn not to much hunger nor
thyrst. beware of lechery / of a cloudy whether and close / eschew much resort
or throng of people / wyndes com ming from fenes or mores / from sleep at
none: use with your meat this poulder / saders red / half an ounce /
cynamom three drammes and a half / saffron half a dram. After your meat /
eat a little of coriander sede / well prepared. In the morning / at a
temperate fire kembe your herd backward / cleanse your body and heed of all
superfluities: use also moderate fricasies / with sweet perfumes / and odours /
wash oftentimes your face and hands with pure vyneger mixed with rosewater. In
cold whether mixed it with myntes / balm / rue / or myrtes / and some time
cloves. In hot summer with roses or vio lets. Above all things use to take
white wine good / white vyneger rosette / water of roses / in equal porcios /
put there unto a little seruale / or of the rynde of a citron, and drink
thereof a little and oftentimes wash therewith your hands and visage.

Medicynes preseruatyue against the pestilence, which be always most ready,
are these, a fig with rue, and a wall nut eaten fasting, also triakle, or
mithridate, to old men a dram weight, to yonge men half a dram, or a
scruple dissolved in vinegar and rose water, or in water of tormentyll,
seabiose or balm, if the plage be in summer: if it be in winter, put to the
waters some white wine. Also the pylles called commonly. Pillule Rasis, but in
dede they were invented by Rufus are very excellent, specially if the al^,
which i^ it, be washed, and thereunto added a little Bolus armenus, terra
sigillata. And if the person be of hot completion, a quantity of sorrel
sede, and red coral, this confectioned with syrope of citrons, in cold
complexions or to old men with wine, use them every third day one pill at a
time, three hours or four before dinner or supper. If ye take triakle or
Mithridate, absteyne from meat at the least syx hours after. A piece of the
(...) of setuall, borne in the mouth preserves, from infection. In likewise
doth sorrel chewed fasting, and the juice sucked down. To poor men, Marsilius
was wont to grue a toste of bread steped in vinegar, with a piece of an onion
or few. Al things which be cordial, that is to say, which do in any wise
comfort the barte, do resyste pestilence, vehement anger, or heuinesse, be
very perniciouse. Other more exquisite and costly preseruatyues, I purposely
pass over, which Marsilius, and othre physicians, do write of abundantly, for
as much as I desire to be in this warke compendiouse. One thing I had
almost forgotten, that there is no better preseruatyue, than to flee frome the
place corrupted, betyme and far of, and to let none approach you, that hath
made their abode, where the plage is fervent. More over receive not into your
house any stuff, that comes out of a house, wherein any person hath ben
infected. For it hath been scene, that such stuff lyenge in a cofer shut by
the space of two years, after that the coffer hath ben opened, they which have
stand nygh to it, have ben infected, and soon after have died. But there I
always except the power of god, which is wonderful, and also merciful, above
mans reason or counsel, preserving or strykyng whom, when, and where it shall
like his majesty, to whom be glory and praise everlasting. Amen.

Thus make I an end of this treatise, desiring them that shall take profit
thereby, to defend it against enuyous dysdayn, on whom I have set the adventure
for the love that I bare to my country: requyrynge all honest physicians to
remember, that the intent to my labour was that men and women redynge this
warke, and observing the counsayles therein, shulde adapte thereby their bodies,
to receive more sure remedy by the medicines prepared by good physicians in
daugerous sykenesses, they keeping good diet, and infourmynge dilygently the
same physicians, of the manner of their affects, passyos, and sensyble tokens.
And so shall the noble and most necessary science of physic, with the
ministers thereof / escape the sclaunder / which they (...) of lunge time
sustained / and according to the precept of the wise man / be worthily
honoured / for asmoche as the highest god did create the physician / for mans
necessity. And of the earth created medicine / and the wise man shall not
abhor it. Thus fare ye well gentle reders / and forget me not with your good
report / and pray to God that I be never wars occupied.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Berthe leti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.


