: Here begins the Book of knowledge of things unknown a parteynynge to
Astronomye with certain necessary Rules, and certain spears containing
herein Compiled by Godfridus super Palladum de agricultura Anglicatum.



Ptholomeus

This is unknown to many men, though they be known to some men.

Here begins the Book of. Knowledge.
Sunday.
IF the Nativity of our Lord come on a Sunday, winter shall be good. Ver shall
be windy, sweet and hot, vintage shall be good Oxen waxes, Sheep shall be
multyplyed, Honny and Milk, and all goods shall be plenteous Old men and women
shall dye, peace and accorde shall be in the land. Also the Sondayes of each
year suynge, in the hour of the day, or of night, to do all things that
thou will begin it is profytable. Who that ben borne shall be strong, great and
shynynge, Who that flies shall be found.

Monday.
IF it come on the Monday winter shall be meddled. Ver shall be wyndye and
good-Somer all dry, or euyn the contrary, if it be rainy full of tempest,
vyntage shall be in mydle assyse. In each monday of the same year in the hour
of day, or of night, to do all things that thou will begin it is good,
dremes perteyneth to effect. Who that ben borne shall be strong. Who that
flies shall soon be found, theft done shall be proved, he that falls in to
his bed soon shall rekeuer.

Tuesdaye.
IF it come on the Tuesdaye, winter shall be good. Ver shall be wyndye, somer
shall be good, bintage shall be traue^louse, women shall dye, shyps shall perisshe
of sees In each tuesday of the same year in the hour of day, or of night, to
do all things that thou will begin it is good. Who that ben borne shall be
strong and coueytous, dreams perteyneth to age. Who that flies shall soon
be found, theft than done shall be proved.

Wednesdaye.
IF it come on the Wednesdaye, winter shall be sharp and harde. Ver shall be wyndy
and evil, somer shall be good, vyntage shall be good traue^lous, good wit y^
shalt find, yonge men shall dye, Honey shall not be earnde, Berers shall
travail, Shypmen shall travail in each year. In each wednesdaye of each year
to do althynges that thou wyl^ begin it is good.

Thursdaye.
IF it come on the Thursdaye, winter shall be good. Ver shall be wyndy, somer good,
vyntage good and plenty shall be, Kings and Princes perameter shall dye. And
in each Thursdaye of each year to do all things that thou will begin it is
good. Who that ^en borne shall be of fair speech worshypful. Who flies shall
soon be found theft done by awenche shall be proved. Who that falls in his
bed rather other latter oft was wont to rekeuer.

Frydaye.
IF it come on the Friday winter shall be maruaylouse Ver wyndy and good,
summer good and dry, byntage plenteous, there shall be dolor of the Air,
Sheep and been shall perysshe. Otes shall be dere. In each Frydaye of each year
to do all things that thou will begin it is good. Who that benborne shall be
profytable Lecherous. Who that flies shall soon be food, theft done by a
Child shall be proved.

Saturdaye.
IF it come on ye saturdaye winter shall be dyrke, snow shall be great, fruit
shall be plenteous Ver shall be wyndy, somer evil, byntage evil by places Otes
shall be dere, men shall wax sick, and been shall dye. In no Saturdaye of that
same year, whether it be in the hour of day, or night to begin every thing
vnneth it shall be good, but if the course of the Moon bring it thereto, theft
done shall be found, he that flies shall turn again to his own they that is
sick shall lunge whale, and vnneth they shall escape, that theyne shulde dye.

Finis the vii. days.
Here follows of the birth of Children.
ON the Sunday, who that is borne he shall be great, and shynyng. Who that is
borne on the Monday, to begin all things he shall be good. Who that is borne on
the Tuesdaye, he shall be coueytous, and he shall peryishe with iron, and vnneth
he shall come to the last age, to begyne all things he shall be good. He that
is borne on the Wednesdaye, he shall lightly learn words. He that is borne on
the Thursdaye, he shall be stable and worship full, and to begin all things is
good. He that is borne on the Friday he shall be of lunge life and lecherous,
(...) to begin all things is good, He that is borne on the Saturdaye, he shall
seldom be profytable, but if the course of the Moon byrngeit thereto.

Here begins the nature and dysposycyon of the days of the Moon with the
^yrth of Children.
The First day.


IN the first Day of the Moon Adam was made, to do all things it is
profytable, and what ever thou will to do good, and that thou see in thy
sleep, shall be well, shall be turned into joy. If thou semest to be overcome,
never the latter, thou shalt overcome. A child that is borne shall soon
wax, and be of lunge life, and rich. He that falls sick shall lunge whale,
and he shall suffer a lunge syckenesse, it is good ^o let a little blode.

The second day.
IN the second Day of the Moon, Eve was made, to do an ernde it is good, and
to do all things it is profytable, to bye and to sell, to sty into a ship,,
to make away, to sow seeds, theft done shalsoone be found. Whatso ever
thou shalt se in sleep, soon effect it shall have, whycher it be good or
evil: to let blode it is good. A child that is borne, soon shall wax, he
shall be a lechour, or a strompe^.

The.iii. day.
IN the.iij. day of the moon Kay^ was borne, of all things that shulde be
done, it behooves to abstain, but only that thou will not that it wax
again, it is good to draw up roots in the yerde and in the field, thefted
one shall be soon be found, whatso ever thou see in sleep, it is nought. Who
that is borne, mently the shall wax, but he shall bye yonge. A sick man that
falls in his bed, shall travail, and he shall not escape, to let blode it is
good.

The.iiii. day.
IN the.iiij. day of the moon Able was borne. Whatso ever thou doest is good
in each travail, the dreams that thou see hath effect. Hope in god and
counsel good. A child that is borne, he shall be a good Treatoure, and much
he shall be praised. A man that falls sick, either soon shall be healed, or
soon shall dye, it is good to let blod.

The.v. day.
IN the.v. day of the moon, do nothing of erndene of werke, to make sacrament,
it is not good. Who that flees, bound or dead, he shall be showed / the
dreams that thou shalt se, shall be well. After that thou haste scene: it
shall be. Beware that thou leese no counsel. A child that is borne shaldye
yonge. He that falls in his bed, soon shalldye, to let blode it is good.

The.vi. day.
IN the.vi. day of the moon, to send children to school, it is good, and to
use hunting, the dreams that thou sha^te se, nyghe shall hap in good, but
beware yt thou say nought to any man. Thy counsel do not discover. A child
borne, shall be of lunge life and sely. A sick man vnneth shall escape, to let
blode it is good.

The.vii. day.
IN the.vij. day of the moon Able was slain. He that falls sick, shaldye,
he that is borne shall be of lunge life, and good to let blode, and to take
drink it is good A dream that thou see, lunge after shall be. Who that flees
shall soon be food, and theft also. To bye swyne, to tame beasts, to clyp
here's, to take all manner of norysshynge, it is good. A sick man if he be
medyeyned, shall be healed.

The.viii. day.
ANd in the.viij. day of the Moon, whatsoever thou will do is good, all
things that thou will treat, to go in cousayle to bye Mancyples beasts:
folds of sheep into another place to change, it is good, to set fundamentes,
to sow Seeds, to go into a way. A child that is borne, shall be sick but in
all days, he shall be a purchasoure, he shall dye yonge. A dream shall be
certain, soon shall be. If thou see sorry things, turn then to the east, he
that waxes sick shall live: theft shall be food, to let blod it behooves in the
myddest of the day.

The.ix day.
ANd in the.ix. day of the Moon, Lames was borne, to do all things it is
profytable, what thing thou will entre to make, it is good, and shall profit.
A dream that thou see, shall come in the day following, or in the second
day, and thou shalt se a sign in the East, and that shall appear in sleep
openly within.xi. days shall come. A child borne in all things shall be a
purchasoure and good, and long of life. A sick man shall wayl^ much and arise.
Who shall be chased, shall not be found, who that is oppressed, shall be
conforted, presume thou not to let blode.

The.x. day.
AND in the.x. day of the Moon, was borne the Patriarch No. What so ever
thou will do shall perteyne to light. Dreams be vain, and within.iiij. days
shall come without peril. A child that is borne, shall enuyron many
countries, and he shall dye old what soever be lost, shall be hyd, who that is
bound, shall be unbound. Who that flees, after shall be found: who that falls
in travail, without peril shall be delivered. Who that falls in his bed, he
shall lunge abide, to let blode, it is good.

The.xi. day.
AND in the.xi. day of the Moon, Sem was borne, it is good to begin werkes, to
go out, to sow, to make wedding. A dream within.iiij. days shall be fulfilled
without perylles, and soon it shall appear after that thou see. A child
that is borne shall be of lunge life relygyous, loueable, he shall have a sign
in ye forhed, or in ye mouth or in the eye, in latter age he shall be made
better. A wench shall have a sign that she shall be learned with wisdom, to go
into a way, it is good, and to change fooldes of sheep, fro place to place,
he that is sick and he be long sick, he shall be healed each day to let blode
it is good.

The.xii. day.
ANd in the.xij. day of the Moon, was borne Canaan the son of Cham,
nothing thou shalt begin, for it is a grievous days, a dream shall be
certain, to joy to the after that thou see, within.ix. days, it shall be
fulfilled to wed and to do erndes it is profytable, that is lost shall be
found. A child that is borne shall be of lunge life angry and honest, a sick
ma shall be grened and arise. Who that is taken shall be left, theft soon shall be
found, to let blode at even it is good. ^ ^

The.xiii. day.
ANd in the.xiij. Day of the Moon. No planted Vynes, in each day Vynes ben
made to plant Vynes it is good. After that thou see, thy dream shall be, and
within four dates it shall come to gladness, but take heed to Psalmes to
Orysons. A child borne in aduersyte shall be let, he shall be angry, and he
shall not be lunge of life. Who that is bound shall be losed, that is lost
shall be food. Who that waxes sick, lunge time shall travail, and vnneth
shall be saved but dye: Towed a wife, it is good, it is good each day to let
blode.

The.xiiii. day.
IN the.xiiij. day of ye Moon it is a good day and a glad. Noc blyssed all
things that shall be done what ever thou will do, and shall come to the to
heal. A dream within six days shall be, to make wedding it is good, and to go
in the way. Axe of thy friend, or thine enemy, and it shall be done to the. A
child that is borne, shall be a tretoure, the sick man shall be changed rise,
and shall be healed by medicine to let blode it is good.

The.xv. day.
ANd in the.xv. day of the Moon. Tongges were divided, do no work, begin no
ernde, for it is a grievous day. A sick man shall lunge travail, but he shall
escape. A dream that thou see nothing shall no^ but soon shall come. A
child borne shall dye yonge, that is lost shall be found, to let blode it is
good. ^ ^

The.xvi. day.
IN the.xvi. day of ye Moon, Pytagoras was borne, the Auc^oure of
Philosophers, to bye and to sell it is good, to tame Oxen and other Beasts. A
dream is not good after lunge time it shall come, and it shall be harmful, to
take a wife to make wedding it is good, folds o^ Sheep fro place to place to
change it is good. A child that is borne shall be of lunge life but he shall
be poor forsworn, a cursed. A sick man if he change his pla^e he shall live,
to let blode it is good.

The.xvii. day.
IN the.xvij. day of ye Moon it is evil to do an (...). A dream that thou
see after lunge time shall be, or withi.xxx. days. A child that is borne
shall be sely, he that is sick shall be much grou^d, and a rise, that is lost
shall ^ found, to send children to scole, to be wedd^ and to make (...) and
take it is good, but not to (...) blode.

The.xviii. day^.
ANd in the.xviij. day of the Moon, is good for althinges to be done, namely
to begin houses. And to set children to scole dreams are good and shall be
done within.xx. days. Who that syckenes hath shall lsoone rise, or lunge be
sick, than cover. Theft than done shall be found. A knave child than borne
shall be vnouercome and eloquent, proud vnpesable, not lunge life. A maid
child than borne, shall be chas^e laborous, senyaunt and b^ter in her hinder
age, they shall both be marked about the knees, not so hardy thou let the blode
this day.

The* xix. day.
IN the.xix. day of ye Moon is not (...) good no full evil, dremes shall ^o
(...) within.xx. days. Who that (...) hath shalsoone rise if he ta^ medicyn^,
theft than done shall not be food. A knave child than borne, shall be true,
benynge, sleyghte, wise, ever wax better and better in great worship, and have
a mark in the brow. A maiden child than borne, shall be eight sick: save not
paid of one man, that day is good to blede.

The.xx. day.
AND in the.xx. day of the Moon, Isaac blessed his soon what ever thou will
do is good, a dream that thou see shall appear, but say it to no man, to
make wedding it is good, to by a mancyple, it is good, to build houses it is
good folds of sheep, fro place to place to change it is good, to tame beestes
and to sow seeds. A child that is borne shall be a fyghter and he shall have
many aryuynges, that is los^e shall be found, to change been it is good. A
sick man shall lunge whale or so^ne (...), to let blode on euyn it is good.

The.xxi. day.
IN the.xxi. day of yt Moon Saull was borne, first king of the Iewes, a
dream is true, and to joy shall pertain within.iiii. days. A child that is
borne shall find much evil, he shall be a th^f^, wy^ty, he shall be a treat our,
and trauaylous. Fsa^ roke the resydue blyssynges of his father, it is good to
heal swyne, and other Beestes: it behooves to abstain fro gamyng things, to
go in the way it is good. A sick man shall vesycke and arise, theft shall be
found, let no blode neither dayene night.

The.xxii. day.
IN the.xxij. day of ye Moon Ioseph was borne, it is a day of holiness, if
thou dost any earnde thou shalt find it grenous, dremes shall be certain,
and shall come to io^e. A child borne, in aldayes shall be a purchesoure,
merry, fair, relygyous, and lyperous. A sick man both late is confirmed and
healed. Been to change from place to place it is good. A sy^ke man shall be
sick, and be healed, to let blode all day it is good.

The.xxiii. day.
IN the.xiij. day of ye Moon Benyamyn was borne, son of the right side, the
last son of the Patriatke No. What ever thou will do is good. A dream that
thou see shall turn to joy, and nothing shall no, and other while it was
wont to fall within eyghte days, To take a wife it is good, to make
weddynges, to set foundamentes to open new earth, to ^ame beasts it is good.
A child borne, shall be out ^aste, and many letrynges, he shall make and in
sins he shall dye. A sick man shall be sick, and arise, it is good to let
blode.

The.xxiiii. day
IN the.xxiiij. Day of the Moon Golyas was borne, a dream that thou see,
sygnifyeth thine heal, and nothing shall no. A child borne shall be
compendyous, and shall do wounderful things. A sick man shall lange wysshe and
be healed to let blode before the third howre it is good.

The.xxv. day.
AND in the.xxv. day of the Moon, Our Lord send signs into Egypt by
Moyses, and in each day he passed the red sea, he that makes sacrament, shall
dye in a peryllous death, beware dred to come, the dream sygnyfyeth harde
thing{is}, and within.x. days it was wont to come, Early the bow thine head
into the East. A child borne shall be an evil man, many perylles he shall
suffer. A sick man shall sustain injury and vnneth shall escape, it is good
to let blode.

The.xxxvi. day.
IN the.xxvi. day of ye Moon Moyses dried the red Sea. In each day Ionathas,
the son of Saule, was borne, deed is Saule with his sons, thou shalt begin
nothing, the dream shall be certain and shall be turned in to joy, to men
Pylgrymes it pertayneth to beware of aspyes, of thine enemies A child borne
shall be full louable, but another rich no poor. A sick man shall travail and
arise, if he have the dropsye he shall dye, to let blode a little, it is
needful.

The.xxvii. day.
IN the.xxvii. Day of the Moon. Our Lord reyned Manna, to the children of
Israell, what ever thou will do is good, be buysy for a dream that thou see
was wont to come, either to good or to evil. A child borne, shall be of lunge
life and most loved, and menlyche strange neither rich no poor. A sick man
shall rise to life, he shall be holden in much langonre, but he shall be
healed, folds of sheep fro place to place to change it is good, to let blode
on euyn, it is good.

The.xxviii. day.
ANd in the.xxviij. day of the Moon, ye da^es ben fighting ^abe^nacles den
fixed in desert, what ever thou will do is good A dream that thou see shall
turn in to Joy, and shall come Welfullyche. A child borne, shall be much
loved, he shall be holden in syckenes. ^ syck^ man that falls in fyrm^c^ soon
shall be saved, to let blode in the evening it accords. ^ ^

The.xxix. day.
AND in the.xxix. day of the Moon, the Iewes went in to the Land of Byheste,
Herode the king, cut of the childrens hedes, begin nothing the dream shall be
certain, and good gladness, and Joy it sygnyfyeth, an (...) begynit is good to
fulfil, to take a wife it is good, but uylte thou not make dowers, no write
testamentes. A child borne shall be of lunge life, wise, and holy, and meke,
to fysshe, and hunt it is good. A sick man shall not greuouslye be sick, but
a escape, it is good to let blode.

The.xxx. day.
IN the.xxx. Day of the Moon* Samuell the Prophet, was borne, what ever thou
will do is good. A dream that appears to the certain, and within.ii. days
thou shalt se, and thou shall find a red Sign in the East, within.ix. days.
A child borne shall be of loge life and profytable, and well mesured in each
thing. A sick man shall nyghe come to death, in no manner let no blode. These
and many other ^tayneth to men after as ye course of the Moon follows.

Of Saturne, and what Saturne is.
SAturne, what is Saturne, he is the first Planet, and the wyckedest, and he
vnbegynneth the zodiake but once in.xxx. year, tha follows it forth in the
zodiake by.xij. signs, that Saturne reygneth in ^che* signs.ij. years and ^
half, in.vi. Signs he reyneth.xv. ^res. And in all the.xij. Signs he (...)
even.xxx. years, right as there ar^.xij. signs in the zodiake, so are
there.xij. months in the year, ^che sign to his month. Wherefore beware
before, and make puruayaunce therefore, and soak when Saturne reyneth in
the.iij. winter signs, that is to say, Capricorne, Aquarie, and Pisces, so
lunge those vij. years and half a year, shall be scarsenes and derth of
corn, fruit Beestes, and all other things, for in the.iij. years Signs* he
hath might and mo^ste power to fulfil his malice, if he be nought le^ed by
neyghbourhed of any good Pla^et*

This next Chapter following declares, what sygnyfyeth the thondre in every
year.
THondre in Ianuarye* signifies the same year, great wyndes plea^ye of corn,
and bat^ay^e. Pera^u^nture also thondre in February year, sygnyfyth that same
(...) many men, namely rich men, shall dye in great syckenesse. Thondre in
M^rche, sygnyfyeth that same ye^r great wyndes, plenty of corns, and debate
amongst people. Thondre in Apryll, sygnyfyeth that same year to be fruytefull,
and merry, and also death of wicked men. Thondre in May sygnyfyeth that year
need scarse^es and berth o^ corns and great hunger. Thondre in June,
sygnyfyeth that same years, that woods shall be ouereasten with wyndes. And
great ragynge shall be of Lyons, Wo^kes, and so like of other harmful Beasts.
Thondre in July, sygnyfyeth that same year shall be good corn, fruits of
Beasts, that is to say, their strength shall peryssh^* Thondre in August,
sygnyfyeth the same year sorrow welyng of many, and o^ most hotethynges, and
also many shall be syeke. Thondre i September, sygnyfyeth that same year great
wind copy of corn, that is to say, plenteous, and occasyon of folk, that
is to say, much falling. Thondre in Octobre sygnyfyth yt same year, great
w^nde and scantnes of Corns, and fruits of trees, Thondre in November
sygnyfyeth that same year to be fruytfull, and merry, and chepe corn. Thondre
in Decembre sygnyfyeth that same year chepe corn, of wheere, peas and accorde
among the people.

This Chapter following, declares what are the evil days, and forboden in the
year. And also which be the best bledynge days in the year.
WIt thou well that in every month, be.ij. evil days, one in waxynge of the
month, and another in the wanynge. The Calendars shows them and their hours
openly enough, in the which days, if any folk take syckenes, or begin any
new thing, it is great grace, if it ever fare well, or come to good end.
Also there are L. Caniculer days, that is to say, from the.xv. Kalefi. of
August, to the N^nas of September, in the which Days it is forboden, by
Astronomye to all manner of folks: That they let them no blode, no take no
Drynkes, and also good it is to abstain than from women, and they shulde
greatleches know and keep, and teach to other men. For why all that time
reygneth a Statre, that is called Caniculacanis, in Latin, a hound in
English, now of this foresaid star Canicula, the foresaid.L. days, are
called Canicular days, that is to say, whore days and bytynge as a Bytche,
for the kind of the star Canicula, is boylynge and beennyng as fire, bi^ynge
as a bytche whelp, that time the heate of the son, and of the star is so
dowlcet and violent, that men's bodies at mydnyght, swetes as at mydday,
swells lightly: blows and brenneth, and if they tha be hurt, than ben they
more sick than at any other time, and right nere^ deed. In those days all
venemouse Serpents, crepeth and flies, and gendreth, and so they ouerset
hugelye the Air, in sedynge of theyrkynde, so yt many a man are deed thereby,
there again al the somer: namely those days, a fire is good night and day,
and wholesome. And sees such meates and take keep of great violent m^ates.

Also from the.xviij. Kalen. of Octobre, to the.xvij. Kalen. of November, look
thou take no cold, for than the poores of man, and of earth, and of all
things else setten. And they may not open again till the.xvij. Kalen. of
Apryll, wherefore such things as thou take, within the poores thaffection
thou shalt hold till they open truly it shulde less harm the'to take cold
at Christenmas than then.

Td Know howe a man shall keep himself in health.
IF thou will keep the lunge in health, than hold this rule, that is to say,
fly anger, wrath, and euur, give the to mirth in measure, travail sadly, so
that thou sweet not to much in the somer and namely in the Canyculer days,
fl all manner of strong drinks hot spices, brennynge meates namely to have
them v^andly. Fast not to lunge at morn. Sup not to late at night, eat not
hastelye: no eat but little at ones: and that, that thou eatest, chew it well
every time that thou eats, rest a little rather after, sleep not ye under
meal, namely out of these.iiij. mouths. That is tosaye, May, June, July, and
August. And yet th^ l^sse that thou slepest than the better it is: sleep well
in the waxynge, of the night, and be early up in the morning, tymelyer the
better. And every day beware of wicked mists that none entre in the fasting,
for thereof comes great pestylences ^ great hete. And in great cold and in
pestylences eat much garlycke every day.ix. Saffron chyues, it will do the
much good. Eat Enough in wyn^er, eat Enough in Ver, but eat but little in
somer, look thy meat be well seasoned in harvest, beware of fruyres, for they
are not good, if it be given the for medicine, of all manners of meates soden is
the best, eat not to many hot spices, no eat but little at ones, for better
it were.vii. times on the day, than ones thy fill, flesh is more norysshynge
than fysshe. Eat not to much sour meates nor salt for they will make thy
bones sore, Loke thy drink be not to new, no to old: Sweet powdered meates be
most wholesome. Of all things take me sure and no more, for in measure rests
virtue. And that seyntes did hold them to

To know what peryllous days: come in the change of every Moon.
IN each change of every Moon be.ij. days in the which, what thing so is
begone, late or never it shall come to end, and the days be full peryllous,
for many things ^

In January, when the Moon is.iij. or.iiij.

In February, when the Moon is.v. or.vij.

In Marche.vi. or.vij.

In Apryll.v. or.viii.

In Mayt.viii. or.ix.

In June.v. or.xv.

In July.iii. or.xiii.

In August.viii. or.xiii.

In September.viii. or.xiii.

In Octobre.v. or.xii.

In November.v. or ix.

In Decembre.iij. or.xiij.

Astronomyers saith, that.vi. days in the year are peryllous of death. And
therefore they forbed men to blede on th^m, or take any drynkes, that is to
say.

The third day of the Month of January.

The first day of the Month of Iulye.

The second day of the Month of Octobre.

The last day of the Month of Apryll.

The first day of August.

The last day going out of Decembre.

These vi days with great dylygence ought to be kept, but namely the
latter.iij. for all the veins are than full. For then wither ma or Beast he
^yt in than, within. vii days, or c^rtaynly within.xiiij. days they shall
dye. And if they take any drynkes, within xv. days they shall dye. And if they
eat of any goose in these.ij days within xl. days they shall dye. And if any
child be borne, in these.iij. latter days they shall dye a wicked death,
Astronomiers and Astrologiers, says that in the beginning of Marche,
the.vij. night or the.xviij. day, let the blode of the right arm. And in the
beginning of Apryll.xi. day on the left arm. And in the end of Ma^e.iij.
or.v. day, on wither arm thou will. And thus of all that year thou shalt
syke^ly^ bewaresshe fro the Fevers, and fro the falling gowte, fro the fyste^
gowte. And fro loss of thy syghte, Bia^magest, insent^o qui of Ptholomei^ Each
man body is rewled by a certain sign of the zodiake. Wherefore as saith
Ptholome^s in the place of Bone. If thou be sick in any lymbe, do no medicine
unto that lymbe, when the Moon is in sign of that lymbe, for it shall rather
hinder, than fourther. And namely flee blode lettynge, it that time of those
limbs. Thus shalt thou know which signs reygneth in which limbs.

The Bull reyneth in the neck and in the throat over all.

The Gemuse reyneth in the shoulder, arms, and hands, and those.iij. be the
signs of Ver.

The Creues or Lobster, Reygneth in the breast, stomach and limbs, arteries,
the mylte, heart, liver, and gall.

The Lyon reygneth in ye back sides, bones, synewe, and grystles.

The Maid reygneth in the womb, mydry^e and gu^tes. And also (...)

Here follows the dyscryption of the.iiij. Elements: and of the.iiij.
Com^lection^.
I Do the to Wit that in each man and woman, reygneth each planet, and every
sign of the zodiak, and every pryme qualytes, and every Element, and every
Complexion, but not in every like, for in some men reygneth one more in some
men reygneth another, and therefore mebe of divers manners, wherefore good is that
we se shortly the kind of those prymes qualytes. And so forth on the other.

Of the four pryme qualytes, and what they are.
Four Pryme Qualytes, there be. That is to say, moystenes, hotenes, drynes be
two contrary^s. And therefore they may no neyghe together without a mean, for
the hotenesse on the one side binds them together, and coldenes on the other
side. Also hotenes coldenes are two contraries, therefore they may not nyghe
together, without a mene, for the moystnes on the one side, binds them
together. And drynes, on the other. Moystenes is cause of every thycke
Substance, and of every sweet taste. And there again drynes is cause of
every thyn substance, and of every sour stynkynge ^ast. And also hotenes is
cause of every red colour, and large quantyte. There again coldenes is cause
of every white colour and little quantyte.

Combine, That is ^o say, knyt these.iiij. pryme qualytes alter these.iiij.
cobinations. That is to say, knyttynges, and than they will hold.iiij.
Elements, that is to say. The Air moyste and hot. The fire hot and dry.
The Earth dry and cold. The Water cold and moyste. The Air the Earth are
two contraries, and therefore they may not neyghe together, but as fire byndes
the on the one side, between them. And the water on the other side between
them. Also Fire and water, are two contraries and therefore they may not neyghe
together, but as the Air between them byndes on the one side. And the Earth
between binds them together, on the other side. The Fire is sharpe, subtle,
and monable. The Air is subtle, monable, and corpulent, and dull. The Earth
is corpulent and thycke. The Water is movable, corpulent and dull. The Earth is
corpulent, dull, and vnmouable, right as an egg shell, Vyngose a thyn skyn.
And ye sign Vyngose the white, and in the midst of the yolke, is a little
tender whole, right so the Fire Vyngose the Air ten times more, and ten times.
Than the Air Vyngose the Water.x. times more, and.x. times tymer than the
water. The water Vyngose the Earth.x. times more, and.x. times tymer than the
Earth. In the heart of the Earth is the senter of the world. That is to say,
the midst point. And in every Sente^ is hell. And there again is above ye
fire are the stars, and above them is heaven christalline, that is to say,
waters of all bliss, departed in nyne orders of Angles, than is heaven in
the highest, rowmest, and largest. And the re again, is Hell in the lowest,
narowest, and straytest.

Right as there be.iiij. Elements, so there be.iiij. Complexions according
in all manner qualytes to these.iiij. Elements,

The First is sanguyne, that is to say, blode gendreth in the livers lymbe,
and like to the Air.

The Second is Cooler gendred in the gall, And like thereto. And it is
according to the fire.

The third is Melancholy, gendred in the mylt, and like to the dregs of
blode, and it accords to the Earth.

The Fourth is Flumes gendred in the lunges like to glat, and it accords to
the water. A sanguyne man much may, and much coueyteth, for he is moyste and
hot.

A Cooloryke man, much coueyteth and little may, for he is hot and dry.

A Melancolyus man, little may, and little coueyte^h, for he is dry and cold.

A Flumatyke man, little couerteth, and little may for is cold and moyste.

A Sanguyne manis large loving, glade of chere, laughing ^oddy, of Colour,
steadfast, tlesshely, right hardy, mannerly, gentle, and well noryrshed.

A Cooleryke man is gylefull, false, and wrathful, tretours, and right hardy,
quynt, small, dry, and black of colour.

A Melancolyus man, is enuyous, sorry, coueytous, harde, and false holdynynge,
gylefull, dredefull, slothful, and clear of colour.

A Flumettyke man is slomery slepy, slow, sleyghtfull, and much spyttynge,
dul^e, and harde of wit, fat visage, and white of colour.

Of the.iiij. quarters of the year: and of the.iiij. complexions: and what
they are.
IN the year be four quarters rewled by these.iiij. coplections, that is to
say, Ver, Summer, Harvest, and winter. Ver hath.iij. months. That is to say.
Marche, Apryll, and May. And is sanguyne complexion. Somer hath also.iij.
months. That is to say. June, Iulye, and August. And this quarteris coleryke
complexion. Harvest hath also three mo^thes. That is to say September,
Octobre, November, and this quarter is melancolyus complexion. Winter hath
also.iij months. That is to say, Decembre, January, February, this
quarteris flumatyke complexion.

Each day also these.iiij. complectios reigns, yt is to say. Fro.iij after
mydnyght, unto.ix. reygneth sanguyne, fro.ix. after mydnyght to.iij. after
mydday, reygneth Coloryke, from.iij. after mydday to.ix. after myddaye reygneth
melancholy, fro.ix. after mydday to.iij. after mydnyght reygneth flume.

Also in the.iiij. Quarters of the world reygneth these.iiij. complexions.
That is to say. Sanguyne in the East, Cooloryke in the South, Melancholy in the
West. And Fleume in the North.

Also the.iiij. Complexions, reygneth in.iiij. ages of man. That is to say,
Cooler in chyldehoode. Sanguyne in ma^hoode, Fleume in age. And M^lancolyus in
old chyldhod. If fro the birth, to.xiiij. year full done, Manhood is from
thens to.xxx. year age. Fro thens to l. year. And old from thens to.lxxx.
year, and so forth to death.

Also these.iiij. coplectios reygneth in.iiij. parts of mans body.

Cooler reyneth in all the coule^ limbs from the breast upward.

Sanguyne reygneth, in all small limbs. Also from the mydryfe to the wesande.

And Fleume reygneth in all noryssheande limbs, also fro the raygnes to the
mydryfe.

And Melancholy reygneth in all the limbs, from the reygnes downward.

Wherefore every mans ^rine is ^as^.iiij. that is to say, Corltyl, Superfyce,
Midst, and ground, every party of the ^ryne to his part, of mans body. And
therefore to.iiij. things in every vryne, we must take heed. That is to say,
Substance, quantyte, Cooler, and content.iii. Substances there are. That is
to say, thycke, thyn, and mydle.

Thycke Substance betokens much moystenes.

Thyn Substance, betokens much drynes.

And mydle Substance betokens temporaunce.

Also.iij. Quatytes be in urine. That is to say. Much, Little, and Mene.

Much quantyte, betokens great cold.

And little quantyte betokens great heate.

And Mean quantyte betokens temporaunce.

Also take heed to the cast, wither it be sweet or not.

Sweet cast betokens health.

And other taste betokens syckenes.

Also in brynes be.xx. Colours, of the which the first.x. betokens cold.
And the other.x. betokens heate.

The.x. colours that betokens cold, are these.

The first is black a derke cole and comes of lived going before.

The second like to leede, and those.ii. betokens mortyficacion.

The third is white as clear water.

The fourth is laktyke, like to whaye.

The fyfte is caropose, like to gray russet: or to Camels beer.

The.vi. is yelow like to falow leues falling of trees. And those.iiij.
colours betokens indygestion.

The seventh is subpale, that is to say, not fullpale.

The right is pale, like to some sodenflesshe.

The nynthe is Subsytryn^, That is to say, fulsycryne.

The.x. is sytryne like to a ponisiter, or to right yalowe flowers.

And these.iiii. colours, betokens beginning of degestyon.

Now we have scene the colours, which betokens cold. So we se the other
ten which betokens heate.

The first is Subryfe. That is to say, not full ruff.

The second is ruff like to fy^ gold.

And those two colours betokens per^yte dygestyon. So the ^ryne be middle of
substance, middle of quantyte, sweet of taste, and without contents.

The third is subryfe, that is to ^a^e full red.

The fourth is red like to Saffron durte.

The fyft is subrugunde, that is to say, not full rubygunde

The syxte is rubygunde like a strong flaume of fire. And these iiij. colours
betokens passing of dygestyon. (???)

The seventh Ynopose like to whytewyne.

The right is kynanos like to ^oten blode. And these two betokens adustyon.

The nynche is grene as the ^ole stock.

The tenth is black, as a clear black horne. And this black comes of grene
going to fore. And these two betokens adustyon and death. ^ ^ ^

In Vry^e be.xviii. contents. That is to say. Serkell, Ampull, ^raynes,
Clouds, Scum, Atterer, Fatness, Humer, Blode, Gravel, Here's, Scalos, Bran,
Crinodose, Sperm, Dust, Eskes, Sedimen, or Ypostas.

The Serkle, shows all the qualytes of the head.

Ampull, that is to say, creme, shows also the brain dysturbed.

Grains betokens of remne, and glut.

Clouds shows vice, of the small limbs.

Scume, that is to say, some, shows ventosyte, and often the Iandyes.

Atterer, that is to say, quiter shows vice of the reygnes. The bladder, or
of the liver.

Fatness as oil drops, shows wasting, and dyssolucion of all the body,
namely of the loins.

Humer like gl^t, or like dre^es of blode, or rotten gall, it shows vice of
the mydryfe, or above or beneth

Blode shows vice of the liver or of ye raygnes, or of ye bladder.

Gravel shows the stone.

Here's shows dyssolucyon, of the fatness of all the body, of the raygnes
namely

Scalos and bran, shows the third spyce of Fever etyke incurable.

Sperm, that is to say, mankynde shows to much lechery.

Dust shows the gowte, or a woman conceyned.

Eskes the preuye harness to be grieved.

Sedymen, that is ^o say, clo^des in the ground of the Vryne, or brekynge up
toward.

The circle is called Ypostas. That is to say, the ground, and it hathemooste
Sygnyfycacyon of all, namely of the lowerpartyes.

Of every mans body be.iiii. princypall limbs, that is to say, soulet limbs,
small limbs, and norysshande limbs, and genderynge limbs.

Sowlet limbs, be the draynes, and all that are there about, down to the
wesande.

Small limbs be the heart, and the lunges, and all that be about them
betwyxte the wesande and the mydryfe.

Norysshynge limbs, be the liver, mile, gall, and guts, and al that be
about them, between the wesande, and the mydryfe, and the Raygnes.

Gendrynge limbs, be the reygnes, bladder, privy harness, and the limbs
about fro the reygnes downward.

Also here follows an A. B. C. Whereby thou (...) know of what Planer every
man is
A. E 1 I. S. 1. B. K. 2. Q. R 2. G.. L. D. M. 4. C. O. ^. V. ^. T. ^. F. 8. P.
^. X. 9.

Depart this by.ix. unto a hundredth. And if one or 8. be over, than the Son
is his Planet. If. 2. or ^. be over, than Venus is his planet. If.. be over,
than he is of Mercurie. If. 4. be over, than he is of the Moon. If. 5. be
over, than he is of Saturnus. If. 6. be over, than be is of Iupiter. If. 7. be
over, than he is of Mars.

Adam. 31. Andren. 1^. Aldon. ^2. Nufos. 12. Benastri^is. 92, Becus. 9. Dauid.
9.

Also here follows another. A B. C. To know by of what sign in the zodiake,
every manis, that is to say under which sign he is borne, and to which
sign, he is most like. Also hereby thou may know his fortune and the moment
in the which he shall dye. Also here by thou may know the fortune, and
infortune of many thing{is}, to bones, cities, and Castles.

A. 2. B. 2. C. 20. D. 41. E. 5. F. 24. G. 3. H. 20. I. 10. K. 13. L. 42. M.
12. N. 22. O. 12. P. 21. Q. 24. R. 27. S. 22. T. ^1. V. 13 X. 20. Y. 20. T. 7.

If thou will know by this. A. B. C. any man as it is said before take his
name his mothers name. And also if thou will know of any town, by this. A. B.
C. as it is said before, than take that towns name, and the name of the City
of Jerusalem, for that is ye mother of all towns, than a count the letters of
the names, by the nobre of this. A. B. C. and when thou haste all done, depart
it by.xxviij. and if one or two be over, than that that thou seek longs to
the whether. And if.iij. or.iii^. or.v. be over, than that that thou seek,
longs to the Bull. And if.vi. or.vii. be over, than longs it to the Iemu^e,
And if.viii. or.ix. be over, than longs it to the Crab. And if.x. xi.
or.xii. than longs it to the Lyon. And if.xiij. or.xiiij. than longs it to
the Virgyn And if.xv. or.xvi. be over, than longs it to the Lyba^de And
if.xvij.xviij. or.xix. than longs it to the Scorpion. And if xx. or.xxi. than
longs it to the Segittarie. And if.xxij. or.xxiij than longs it to the
Capricorne. And if.xxiiii. or.xxv. than longs it to the Aquarie. And
if.xxvii. or.xxviii. than longs it to the Fysshe.

Another Alphebet.
Depart any thing in vi^. by the proper name of these letters: A. will tell,
which of the.vi^. it is by the over nobre divided by.ix.

A. 3 I. 3. R. ^. B. 4. K 5. S. 13 C. 2, L ^. T. ^. D 2. M. 25. V. 1^. E. ^. N
25 X. ^. F. 4. O 1^ Y. 5^. G. 2. P. 13. ^ 34. H 5. Q. 15.

To know the whether yt shall be all the year / after the change of every Moon,
by the Pryme days.
Sunday Pryme / dry W^ther /
Monday Pryme / moist Whether /
Tuesdaye Pryme / cold and Wind /
Wednesdaye Pryme / metu^y^ous /
Thursdaye Pryme / fair and clear /
Frydaye Pryme / fair and sow^ /
Saturdaye Pryme / ^ayne.
A Rule to know upon what Letter, what Hour, and what mynute as toloweth.
Pryme upon hor^ mym^.
A. ^9. 9. B. 4. 5. C. 13. 1. D. 20. 18. E. 18. 12. F. 21. 4. G. 15. 20.

EVermore thus reygueth these.vij. plants. First reygneth Saturne. Than
Iupiter, Than Mars, Than Sol, Than Venus, Than Mercurie, and than Luna. Saturne
is Lord on saturdaye, Iupit is lord on thursdaye, Mars is lord of tuesday,
Sol on sunday, Venus on frydaye, and Mercurie of wednesdaye, and Luna on
monday. Saturne. Iupiter, Mars, Sol, and Mercurie, is masculyne. That is to
say mankynde, Venus and Luna, are femynyne, that is to say womankind.
Saturne, Mars, and Luna, are evil plants. Iupiter, Sol, and Venus, be good
plants, and Mercurie is changeable.

On saturdaye the first howre after mydnyght, reygneth Saturne, the second
howre Iupiter, the third howre Mars, the.iiij. howre Sol, the.v. howre Venus,
the.vi. howre Mercurie, the.vij. howre, Luna. And then again Saturne,
the.viij. howre, and Iupiter the.ix. howre, Mars the.x. howre, Sol, the.xi.
howre, Ve^{us} the.xij. howre, Mercurie the.xiii. howre, and Lun^ the.xiiij
howre. Than again the third of day time. Saturne the.xv. howre. Iupiter
the.xvi. howre, Mars the.xvij. howre, Sol the.xviij. howre, Venus the.xix.
howre, Mercurie the.xx. howre, and Luna the.xxi. howre. And than again
the.iiij. time. Saturne the.xxii. howre. Iupiter the.xxiij. howre* Mars
the.xxiiij. howre. And ^ begins Sol in the ^ mydnyght on the Sunday, Venus
the.ij. howre, Mercurie the third howre, Luna the.iiij. howre, Saturne the.v.
howre. And so forth howre by howre, and planet by planet, in ordre as they
stade. Each planet in his own day, teygneth ever more certaynely the first
howre, the.viii. howre, the.xv. howre, and the.xxii. howre. And so forth
evermore one after another. And next after that reygneth the Planette that is
next in ordre as thus Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus Mercurius and Luna.

Of the most best and profytablest days that be in the year to let blode.
IN the beginning of Marche. That is to say, the.vi. and the.x. day, thou
shalt draw out blode of the right arm. In the beginning of Apryll of the
left arm, and that in the.xi. day for the sight In the end of May, of which
arm thou will, and that again the Fevers, and if thou so dost, neither thou
shalt lose thy sight, no thou shalt have no Fevers howe lunge thou live.

Quot reti^t vita et no morti^ Imago Si seper fuerint viuent morietur ^t infra.



Collge {pro} numeros a^iquid cupis esse {pro} (...)
Iunge simul nome ^utu fetiaq die.
A.iij. K.xv. V.iiij. B.vi. L.xxi. X.vi. C.xij. M.xxv. y.vi. D.xx. N.xxij.
z.iij. E.xxvi. O.xx. F.xxv. P.xiiij. G.iij. Q.xvi. R.xiii^. S.xxix. T.xxvii^.
Sunday. xii^. Monday. xviij. Tuesdaye. xv. Wednesdaye. xxv. Thursdaye. xi.
Frydaye. xv. Saturdaye. xxvi.

Thus ends the Sper^ of Platon.

SE^nt Beede saith, that if any man be let blode, or take any medicine in the
last day of Apryll or the first day of Harvest, or the last day of the
month of Decembre, within.xlvi. days, he shall be deed, and if any man in
those days eat of a goose, within.xl. days he shall be dead.

Who ever in the.vii. day of Marche lets him blode in the right arm in
the.xi. day of Apryll in the left arm, he shall not lose the sight of his
even. And in the.iiii. or.v. last day of May, in the both arms be let no
blode he shall have no Fevers

Who so ever in the first day of each month, falls into any infyrmyte, the
third day suynge is to dread, which if he pass he shall ascape till xxx.
days.

Who so falls in the.ii. day is to dread, which if he pass though he loge
be sy^ke he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the.iii. day, at (...) shall be delivered.

He that falls in the.iiii. day sick he shall be grievously to the.xxviii. day,
which if he pass shall escape.

He that falls ye.v. day, though^ he suffer griuously he shall escape.

He that falls in the.vi. day, though he seem to be healed never the latter
in the.v. day of the other Moon he shall be dead.

He that falls the.vii. day without grefe he shall be delivered.

He that falls the.viii. day, if he be not whole at the.xii. day, he shall
be dead.

He that falls in the.ix. Day, though it be with great great, he shall
escape.

He that falls in the.x. day without doubt he shall be dead.

He that falls the xi. day he shall be delivered at the next.

He that falls in the.xij. day but if he be delivered within.ij. days
within.xv. he shall be dead.

He that falls in the.xiij. day, till to.xviij. days, he shall be sick,
which if he pass, he shall escape.

He that falls in the.xiiij. day, he shall dwell till to.xv. and so he shall
escape.

He that waxes sick the.xv. day but if he recover within xviij. days he
shall be dead.

He that falls in the.xvi. day, though he be grieved till xxiiij. days, till
to.xxviij. days, he shall escape

He that falls the.xvii. day, he shall dye the.x. day.

He that falls in the.xviij. day soon shall be healed.

He that falls in the.xix. day, also shall escape.

He that falls in the.xx. day, sick in the.v. day he shall escape, but
never the less, in the month following he shall be deed.

He that waxes sick in the.xxi. day, but he run into peril of death
within.x. days of that other month, he shall be delivered.

He that waxes sick in the.xxij. day, but he run into peril of death
within.x. days of that other month he shall be delivered.

He ye falls in ye.xxii^ day, though it be with greuousnesse of payne in the
other month he shall be delivered

He that falls in the.xxiiii. day, in the xxii. day, he shall be delivered, but
nevertheless in the month fold wing, he shall be dead.

He that falls sick the.xxv. day though he suffer a little, nevertheless he
shall escape.

He that falls in the.xxvi. day, though he suffer to the ou^ passing
nevertheless in that other month he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the xxvii. day, it manaseth death.

He that falls in the.xxviij. day it manasseth death.

He that falls the. rxix. day, little and little in that other month he
shall be delivered.

He that falls sy^ke in the.xxx. day, it is doubt whether he pass any of
th^se.

Also he that waxes sick in the.xxxi. day, whether he shall escape, it is
unknown.

Explicit.
Imprinted by me Robert Wire: Dw^llynge at the Sign of S. Iohn Euangelyst, in
S. Martyns Parish, beside Charynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio (...) imprim^dum. o. um.


